---
weight: 11
title: Lesson 11
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
---

**GOD GIVES US THE HOLY SPIRIT**

**WHICH EXERTS CONTROL OVER US**

Romans 8:1--17

**REVIEW**

> How is Paul's teaching about the sinful nature and the new inner being
> in the believer confirmed in your own life?

**ROMANS 8: 1 -- 8**

> Paul said in chapter 7 that living the Christian life will not be
> easy. We have a sinful nature that is constantly with us and
> frequently leading us into sin. It is an ongoing battle. Now, he
> emphasized the Spirit and its mighty influence in the believer's life.
> Anyone who is in Christ Jesus, think of it as in the sphere of Christ
> Jesus, there is no condemnation. There isn't a single judgment that
> can be raised against a believer. The reason, "because" (vs 2), is
> Jesus set me free from the control of sin and death. Sin and its
> condemnation resulting in eternal separation from God is gone. The law
> itself could never accomplish this. It couldn't produce a single
> acquittal before God. The law was powerless to do that, not because of
> a problem with the law, but the sinful nature only rebelled against
> God's will. God went into action and solved the problem. Here is a
> listing of what God did:

-   sent his own Son - Jesus

-   sent him in human likeness -- had a true humanity and real flesh and
    blood. Phil 2:7 "human likeness" however he had no sin.

-   to be a sin offering -- he offered himself as the sacrifice for the
    sin of the world

-   condemned sin -- instead of sin condemning us, Sin was condemned, it
    was paid for, it couldn't threaten us with eternal judgment anymore.

-   righteous requirements of the law -- Jesus lived a life that fully
    and perfectly kept the law. His perfection is credited to believers
    and is now "in us" (4).

> The sinful nature of an unbeliever prompts a mindset, a way of
> thinking, that only reflects who they are. There whole being and
> existence conforms to the sinful nature. There whole thought process
> flows from the sinful nature. The contrast is equally true for the
> person who believes and thus has received the Holy Spirit. According
> to their new man, in the new way of the Spirit (7:6) the believers
> thought process flows from that Spirit.
>
> Those controlled by the sinful nature are only hostile to God, they
> can't submit to God's will and can't do anything pleasing to God. In
> the next verses Paul develops the thought of the Spirit's influence on
> believers.

**DISCUSSION**

> 1\. What Christ accomplished blessings does Paul celebrate in vs. 1-2?
>
> 2\. How did God remove the sin that the Law exposed and condemned but
> we could not get rid of? (3-4)
>
> 3\. What is the spiritual condition of those controlled by the sinful
> nature? (5-8)
>
> 4\. By contrast, what is the spiritual condition of those who are
> controlled by the spiritual nature? (5-6)
>
> 5\. Why can't those controlled by the sinful nature please God? (8)

**ROMANS 8: 9 -- 17**

> It is impossible to be a believer and not have the Holy Spirit. The
> Holy Spirit creates faith and so whenever the Holy Spirit is in a
> person, there faith has already been created by the Spirit and he is
> present. Paul said the Spirit of God lives in you -- ongoing action.
> It isn't that the Spirit created faith and then moves on to another
> person and we are left on our own. The Spirit of God lives in every
> believer. Although the Spirit lives in us, our body is still destined
> to die (10), but our spiritual nature is alive. It is alive "because
> of righteousness." (10) The word translated righteousness has two
> basic meanings, (1) being declared not guilty before God because of
> Jesus, acquitted of all wrong before God (2) doing what is right in
> God's eyes. Both options would fit here, but the second fits the
> context better. Our spiritual nature under the control of the Holy
> Spirit is guiding us to do what is right before God. This isn't
> earning our forgiveness but it is the evidence that the Holy Spirit
> has created faith in us. Even though our bodies are destined to die,
> they will be raised to eternal life.
>
> Through Christ and the Holy Spirit's work we are the sons of God. The
> term sons of God refers to both male and females, through Christ we
> are the children of God. We have been adopted into God's family and
> can call the Almighty God our Father. The Holy Spirit testifies and
> our spiritual nature also testifies that we are God's children and
> thus heirs of eternal life. What gracious blessings the Spirit brings
> to us in Christ.

**KEYWORD -- SONS OF GOD**- A term that includes every believer, male or
female, ethnic group or occupation in a society (Galatians 3:26-28)

**DISCUSSION**

> 6\. Comment "You cannot have spiritual life with God without God the
> Holy Spirit."
>
> 7\. What are some of the blessings the Holy Spirit brings to us?
>
> 1\) vs 9
>
> 2\) vs 10
>
> 3\) vs 11
>
> 4\) vs 13
>
> 5\) vs 14
>
> 6\) vs 15
>
> 7\) vs 17
>
> 8\. Paul said, "by the Spirit you put to death the misdeeds of the
> body" (13). "Put to death" is present tense. What does that mean about
> our daily lives?
>
> 9\. How do we put to death the misdeeds of the body? How does that
> relate to what Paul said about himself in chapter 7:14-20?

**[PREPARING FOR NEXT WEEK'S CLASS]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 8:18 -- 39

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 133 - 145

3.  Read Romans 8:18 -- 39 a second time but this time out loud.

Since we aren't slaves to fear in Christ (15) what kind of attitudes and
confidence can we have in Christ?
