---
weight: 2
title: Lesson 2
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
---

**GOD'S JUDGMENT IS DESERVED UPON ALL GENTILES**

Romans 1:18-2:16

**REVIEW**

> Be prepared to answer: Someone is talking with you and is convinced
> they haven't done enough to continue to receive God's forgiveness. How
> might you use words from this section to help them see the truth?

What makes the gospel so powerful?

**ROMANS 1:18-20**

> God's wrath, his anger, isn't to defend his wounded pride, it is a
> reaction to the evil sinfulness he sees in people. It will be revealed
> in all of its terror at the end of time but what Paul is speaking
> about here occurs now. He uses the present tense, "is being revealed."
> The first word, godlessness, refers more to attitudes. Disregarding
> God -- he isn't important. Ignoring anything he commands and so I have
> no responsibility toward him. The second word, wickedness, points to
> actions that are opposed to God's will. God sees every thought and
> action of each one of us, nothing will escape his notice and anger.
> Humans then try to suppress the truth about God so they wouldn't feel
> guilty. People will go to great lengths to keep down the knowledge of
> God so that they don't have to deal with guilt and their need of
> Jesus.
>
> God has clearly revealed aspects of himself in creation. Evolution
> tries to replace God with theories of our origin. As more complex
> scientific discoveries are made -- the more we are reminded of the
> power and wisdom of God in creation. With each new complex discovery
> of our world, the more fantastic the explanation has to become for
> those rejecting God. We shake our heads in amazement at what has to be
> believed in order to keep God from getting the glory.

**ROMANS 1:21-25**

> Notice how Paul describes the unbelievers as determined not to glorify
> God or give thanks to him. God certainly isn't forcing them to rebel
> against him. The unbeliever is doing it on their own. Notice also the
> beginning of verse 24, the word "Therefore." As a result of the
> previous actions and attitudes now this follows, "God gave them over"
> even now he doesn't force them to rebel but allows the rebellion to
> takes its natural course. As we think about this, don't assume if
> somebody fails to glorify God once or twice then suddenly God will
> give them over. We have plenty of examples of the patience and mercy
> of God to give people multiple chances to repent. There is however a
> point, when God says OK -- pursue your rebellion and refusal to
> glorify and thank me.
>
> They exchange the glory of the creator for lie of created things.
> Whether those are objects to represent various created animals or
> humans or simply created things like wealth, power or earthly fame. It
> is all a lie and isn't the answer to a life with God or to existence
> here on earth.

**ROMANS 1:26-32**

> Three times we read, "God gave them over" (24,26,28). Each time it is
> another step downward. They have "suppressed the truth" (18). They
> have rejected the natural knowledge of God, his power and his glorious
> being evident in the world and decided to live their life in total
> disregard of the Lord. They turn to false gods of all kinds, then to
> depraved sexual activity and then minds totally corrupted. Twenty-one
> different sins are reported. Each one has a negative impact on the
> person, discord in the family, and turmoil in a society. Worst of all
> it is evidence of people separated from God. Sin never leads to
> greater satisfaction or ultimate fulfillment in life.

**DISCUSSION**

1.  What other qualities of God can we learn from nature in addition to
    > the two listed by Paul?

2.  Why is every human being without excuse before God? (20)

3.  Describe godlessness and wickedness and then how is it evident in
    > our world? (18)

4.  As people repeatedly deny God or any accountability to God for their
    > thoughts and actions what happens to their thinking? (21-22)

5.  What evidence do you see of that in the world around you?

6.  People can not only be depraved in their own thinking and actions
    > but what further step can they take? (32)

7.  Is it possible for someone on this downward spiral to be turned
    > around and brought to faith in Jesus?

**ROMANS 2:1-4**

> Who is the person addressed in verse 1 and following? Suddenly Paul
> turns to "you". In verse 17 he refers to the Jews and he may well be
> talking about them at this point already. He could also be talking
> about a Gentile, who thinks, "I don't live a crass immoral life like
> the people Paul described in chapter 1. "I live a respectable life."
> Paul could be addressing a person who is living a more moral life. For
> the more moral person it can be easy to pass judgment on the defiant
> sinners. The Bible says God's judgment (at the end of time) will be
> based on truth (2), the facts as they are before God. The judgment
> wouldn't be done based on comparing what we have done to others but on
> what we did in comparison to God's perfect will. Yet, God hasn't
> struck us with his judgment but has shown kindness, tolerance (the
> original word has the idea of holding back judgment) and patience
> (giving time for the person to realize their sin). In all of this God
> is wanting to lead us to repentance.
>
> Repentance means to have a change of mind or heart. Our self-righteous
> attitude has been crushed as we see our sin and trust only Jesus for
> our forgiveness. The unbelievable kindness of God expressed to us.

**KEYWORD: REPENTANCE --** A change of mind or heart

**ROMANS 2:5-11**

> Paul continues his thought, the morally superior person in
> self-righteousness judging the crass sinner is storing up anger from
> God that will be unleashed on Judgment Day. There is no favoritism by
> God he will judge according to what each person has done. Each person
> will need to persist in doing good. Not just doing something good
> occasionally but always -- persistence. God's standard is perfection.
> We all, every single one of us is guilty and fall short. God will give
> eternal life to anyone who keeps the law perfectly. The problem is we
> can't persist in keeping the law perfectly. In today's entire lesson,
> there isn't any gospel, only law.

**ROMANS 2:12-16**

> In verse 13 we have a very important Greek word. Translated, declared
> righteous. What is the meaning of that word? Some suggest that it
> means make righteous, to reform the sinner, to make a good person out
> of a bad person. Look at the context here. The Bible says, that the
> person who obeys the law, consistently and completely, that person
> will be declared righteous by God. If the person has obeyed the law
> perfectly, they aren't a bad person they are already good. They don't
> need to be made righteous, they already are, after all they kept the
> law perfectly. The word means to declare righteous. There isn't any
> other way to understand it here. The one who "obeys the law" did the
> right things and in the final judgment God will declare that the
> person is right in his sight. We are talking about the definition of
> the Greek word, declare not guilty. This passage is one that clearly
> identifies the meaning of the word. That meaning, consistent in the
> Bible, is important as we look at passages later in the book of
> Romans. Just a quick word about the context here, the point of this
> section is that no one is perfectly obedient to the law, therefore no
> one will be declared righteous in his sight because we haven't kept
> the law. We are all sinners before God.
>
> Verse 16 says that "God will judge men's secrets." Secrets can be
> things we did that most people don't know (maybe no one). Secrets can
> be the motives we had for doing what we did, even good things we did.
> Secrets can be thoughts we cultivated or had that just went through
> our mind in a flash and never returned, if fact we don't even remember
> them. Everything will be exposed and nothing hidden.
>
> The word gospel in verse 16 is used in a broader sense. God can not
> overlook sin, judgment is real. We can't save ourselves. God sent
> Jesus to save us from our sin. The law and the fact that we are all
> sinners along with the good news that Jesus was sent for us was Paul's
> message for people. It was the good news.

**DISCUSSION**

8.  How do you understand the words, "God judgment...is based on truth"?
    > (2:2)

9.  How can God shown "his kindness, tolerance and patience" with a
    > person to lead him (her) to realize sin in life resulting in
    > repentance? 4

10. Why isn't vs 7, "To those who by persistence in doing good...he will
    > give eternal life" a contradiction of Ro.1:17, "The righteous will
    > live by faith"?

11. Give evidence in your culture of the natural knowledge of God's
    > will.

12. Why would we also want to refer to other passages, like Romans
    > 3:21-24, as we share the Word of God from chapter 2?

**[Preparing for next week's class]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 2:17 -- 3:20

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 39-56

3.  Read Romans 2:17 -- 3:20 a second time but this time out loud.
    > (Hearing God's Word can prompt us to realize additional truths we
    > didn't grasp with a silent reading.)

Be prepared to answer: Every person you ever meet in your life has a
conscience. A conscience that in part is telling them they have done
somethings that are wrong. How can that be helpful as we share our faith
with someone?
