---
weight: 3
title: Lesson 3
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
---

**GOD'S JUDGMENT IS DESERVED UPON ALL JEWISH PEOPLE**

Romans 2:17-3:20

**REVIEW**

> Be prepared to answer: Every person you ever meet in your life has a
> conscience. A conscience that in part is telling them they have done
> some things that are wrong. How can that be helpful as we share our
> faith with someone?
>
> What is the meaning and thought of the word "declare righteous?"

**ROMANS 2:17-24**

> In the previous section (Romans 2:1-16) Paul spoke about people who
> lived very moral lives. They could have been Gentiles or Jews, but
> their lives were marked with far better morals than those described
> and convicted of guilt in Romans 1. They are however, still guilty
> because they haven't consistently kept the law.
>
> Now Paul turns his attention to the Jews in particular. He begins with
> a series of clauses. Each starts with the word "if". The thought of
> each clause is a common held perception the Jews had of themselves.
> They would have quickly agreed with the points. I am glad I am a Jew,
> I have the law of God and I am in a relationship with God. I know his
> will because we are the nation that received the revelations from God.
> I have tested the law and approve of what really matters in life. I am
> constantly taught by the law.
>
> Paul makes a turn in the thought in verse 19. He portrayed their
> privileged position as a Jew. Now he describes the attitude of the Jew
> toward others. The Jews felt they were in a position to help the
> spiritually blind, to teach those in the dark about knowing the true
> God, to instruct those who didn't have a clue (foolish) about God, to
> help the helpless (infants) to understand the living Lord.
>
> The Jews were in a unique position but now Paul suddenly starts
> raising some questions. Were they learning and applying God's law to
> themselves? With each question the initial answer might be, "No, I
> don't do those things." After a closer examination, they would have to
> confess, "Yes, I have." Their hypocrisy was obvious to the Gentiles
> and they weren't attracted to the Lord but rather spoke against the
> God of Israel. They couldn't claim salvation on the basis of the law
> and obedience. They were sinners.

**DISCUSSION**

1.  We like the Jews also are privileged to have and learn from God's
    > Word. Why do we need to apply God's law to our lives as Paul is
    > doing here to the Jews?

2.  How can God's name be blasphemed (dishonored) in the eyes of people
    > around us?

3.  Remember there is no gospel in these early chapters of Romans, as we
    > apply these words to ourselves why do we need to flee to Jesus for
    > comfort and strength?

**ROMANS 2:25-29**

> The Jew could still think, but I have been circumcised. That will
> count before God. Paul demolishes that thought! Paul's first point is
> that circumcision only has value if the law is still kept perfectly.
> If one breaks the law, circumcision wouldn't help, the person is like
> an uncircumcised individual (vs 25). If the Jew is like an
> uncircumcised person, they aren't part of God's people. In verse 26,
> Paul reverses it. If an uncircumcised person keeps God's law
> consistently (in theory -- this isn't possible because we are all
> sinners) they will be regarded as a child of God (circumcised).
>
> Paul continues by saying the Gentile (uncircumcised) will condemn the
> Jew who hasn't kept God's law perfectly. Is that what Jesus was saying
> in Matthew 12:41-42? The Gentiles who heard God's call to repentance
> will stand in judgment over the Jews who rejected the Savior. The
> Jewish trust in their family background, their partial obedience to
> God's will and that they were outwardly circumcised has been blown
> apart by these words.
>
> Paul isn't done. In verse 28-29, he makes the point that circumcision
> is something inward worked by the Spirt in someone's heart and has an
> outward action to remind the person they are a child of God. A Jew
> before God is first someone whose heart has been changed by the
> Spirit. This isn't a new thought in Scripture. Remember Old Testament
> passages where God spoke of Israel's uncircumcised hearts (Leviticus
> 26:41)? God called upon Israel to circumcise their hearts (Deuteronomy
> 10:16, 30:6). Circumcision was always spiritual with an outward sign
> to remind each person. Circumcision was always a cutting of the heart
> (cutting away sin -- repentance) and a trust in the compassionate and
> gracious God who forgave their sin through the promised Messiah.
>
> Notice that the identity of God's people isn't based on family or
> obedience but on the Spirit working in the heart of a person. The
> Bible says, "If you belong to Christ, then you are Abraham's seed, and
> heirs according to the promise" (Galatians 3:29). The believer in
> Jesus is Abraham's seed -- a descendant of Abraham -- not by a
> physical connection but by a faith like Abraham trusting God's word
> and promise.

**DISCUSSION**

4.  What can be some dangerous thoughts or attitudes (similar to the
    > Jews) that could give us a false sense of security that we are
    > God's children?

5.  In what way could it be said that every believer, no matter what
    > their ethnic background, is a Jew? 28-29

**ROMANS 3:1-4**

> Paul has made the strong point that simply being a circumcised Jew
> doesn't result in the person being a child of God and an heir of
> eternal life. An inward circumcision of the heart, a belief in God's
> Word was critical. This was jarring for most Jews because they
> believed the most important things were outward. Anticipating their
> object he asks their question, What is the advantage of being a Jew?
> He answers quickly you have the inspired Word of God. If someone
> doesn't believe the Word of God that doesn't make God's Word a lie.
> God's Word remains true and will never be proved false.
>
> Part of the difficulty of this section is that Paul moves quickly from
> one question to an answer to another logical question that might be
> raised and then a quick answer again.

**DISCUSSION**

6.  What important reminder for us is found in vs. 1-2?

7.  How does God's absolute faithfulness even when we are unfaithful
    > give us encouragement and strength?

**ROMANS 3:5-8**

> As Paul continues his rapid fire questions and answers, we get the
> impression these were actual human arguments that he has heard people
> raise. People do try to challenge the Christian faith by using human
> not G odly logic. The questions raised end up trying to ridicule
> Christianity by setting up some false logical conclusions that end up
> saying, "Do evil so that God looks holier and more just!" The
> accusation has even been made that was Paul's teaching. Paul destroys
> each question. He finally simply says, "Their condemnation is
> deserved." (Romans 3:8) Remember the ongoing point unbelieving Jews
> are also guilty before God and every attempt to say anything different
> will only end in judgment of God.

**DISCUSSION**

8.  Someone might argue, "If you tell someone their sins are completely,
    > fully paid for by Jesus and you simply invite them to believe it.
    > They will then sin all the more because they think they have
    > forgiveness." How would you respond?

**ROMANS 3:9-18**

> The Jews are not in a better position nor a worse position before God.
> Paul gives the reason in the second half of verse 9 "all under sin."
> We are all under the continuing condition of sin's domination. Paul
> uses seven Old Testament quotations to support his point of the
> universal nature of sin among humans. He says twice - all have gone
> their own way; four times -- no one is righteous; two times -- not
> even one. There are no exceptions -- God can't find anyone who has
> kept his will perfectly.
>
> He then portrays the terrible results of sin in the world. As an open
> grave with a body decaying in it has a strong odor, so are our sinful
> throats whose words are foul smelling before God. Mouths that speak
> deceitful words, hurtful words (poison), cursing or bitter words.
> Bitter words are rebellion against God as we are angry or frustrated
> with a difficulty that God has allowed into our life. The actions of
> humans reflect sin as well (vs. 15-16). As people live in this
> rebellion there is no respect for God but only refusal to listen to
> him and a lifting up of self before God. The evidence of the
> universality of sin is seen in every single human being.

**DISCUSSION**

9.  What does it mean to be "under sin" (vs 9)?

10. Paul says, "There is no fear of God before their eyes." (18) How is
    > that the root sin of all others?

**ROMANS 3:19-20**

> The last word of this section is "sin." Literally the Greek word means
> to miss the mark. It is used in the context of archery and an arrow
> missing the bull's eye. This obviously is an important word in the
> Bible. God's law identifies the target we are to hit with a perfect
> obedience but we miss the mark. We fail to keep it perfectly and so we
> fall short of hitting the center of the target. Because of the law we
> are aware, conscious, of the fact that we are sinful. The law only
> brings us a knowledge of our sin, not the forgiveness of sins. Since
> we cannot find the perfection inside of us, we will only find it
> outside of us.

**KEYWORD: SIN** -- Miss the mark, failing to hit the bull's eye of
perfection to the law

**DISCUSSION**

11. What does the word "accountable to God" communicate to you?

12. Why do we have to keep teaching the law over and over again to God's
    > people?

**[PREPARING FOR NEXT WEEK'S CLASS]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 3:21 -- 3:31

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 57-67

3.  Read Romans 3:21 -- 3:31 a second time but this time out loud.

Be prepared to answer: Why do we need to continually apply the law to
our own heart?
