---
weight: 8
title: Lesson 8
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
---
**GOD MAKES US ALIVE IN CHRIST JESUS**

Romans 6:1 --14

**REVIEW**

> What are the two main points that Paul brings out in 5:12--21?

**ROMANS 6:1--4**

> Paul stated previously, "Where sin increased, grace increased all the
> more." (5:20) Paul's point was that with the giving of the law of
> Moses, human beings became more aware of all the commands they
> disobeyed. They have a growing understanding of the depth and darkness
> of their guilt and a greater understanding of the depth and height of
> God's grace. When some people heard that, they reasoned then lets
> continue to sin so that God's grace can shine more and more. Paul
> rejected that line of thought in the strongest of terms.
>
> He discusses what happens when a person is baptized. Baptized in
> Christ, connects us to the acquittal that Christ already accomplished
> and it becomes ours through faith. As a result of Spirit implanted
> faith a new attitude is instilled in us. Because of our new
> relationship with Jesus, we no longer have the same relationship with
> sin. We don't love sinning any more. In Paul's words, "We died to sin"
> (2). That loving relationship with sin is over. So his question, "How
> can we live in it (sin) any longer?" (2) Baptism connected us to
> Jesus, his death and his resurrection. With the death of Christ, he
> carried our sin, once for all. Jesus would never have anything to do
> with sin again. All the world's sin was paid by Jesus. He died to sin
> (10). In our baptism we are connected to Jesus and his payment for sin
> and like Jesus died to the mastery of sin. (14)
>
> In our baptism we were also connected to the resurrection of Jesus. In
> Paul's words that "we too may live a new life" (4). In this new
> relationship with Jesus, we have a new attitude in life. In thankful
> love for his grace filled forgiveness, we want to serve our Lord.

**KEYWORD: GRACE** -- God's undeserved love for all people expressed by
Jesus coming to pay for all sin

**DISCUSSION**

1.  What powerful work and blessing does baptism bring to a person?

2.  What is the parallel in these verses between Christ and us in his
    death and in his resurrection?

**ROMANS 6:5 -- 11**

> Paul begins this section stating that "We have been united with him in
> his death...in his resurrection" (5). With the completed payment for
> sin by Christ, he was done with sin. He didn't have anything to do
> with it anymore. He was dead to it. We in our baptism are united to
> his death, we no longer want anything to do with sin. It no longer has
> total dominance over us -- we are no longer slaves to it (6). In
> baptism we are united to his resurrection -- "we will also live with
> him." (8) We live this new life now and on into the future. A new life
> because we are "alive to God in Christ Jesus." (11) The believer has a
> new identity, dead to sin -- no longer wants to sin (although we
> obviously still have sins of weakness that Paul will address later)
> and a new desire to live to God.

**DISCUSSION**

3.  What is the risen Christ's relationship with death? (9-10)

4.  What is the positive result of our old sinful nature being crucified
    with Christ?

5.  What does it mean, "Jesus lives to God"? (10)

**ROMANS 6:12--14**

> Paul has stressed the new attitude that we have because of Jesus in
> the previous sections. Now he begins to outline how that attitude
> works out into the actions of life. While we have a new identity in
> Christ, the battle with sin continues throughout our life. He
> emphasizes both the negative, "don't let sin reign" and the positive,
> "offer yourselves to God". Our sinful nature will raise its ugly head
> to present evil desires that can be expressed through our eyes, ears,
> hands, feet and every part of our body. We don't let sin rule by
> defeating those desires but also by repentance. We come before our
> Savior God with sorrow over our failures, hear his wonderous assurance
> of forgiveness and a desire to live a new life in Christ. We offer the
> same parts of our body to serve our God in the actions of our daily
> life. Our motivation isn't the demands of the law or a compulsion to
> keep the law to satisfy God. We are forgiven through Christ. We live
> under grace. His love demonstrated toward us through Christ motivates
> us. His pure love freely given prompts and grows our thankful love.
> Our motivation is the Gospel. God's gracious good news powers our
> life.

**DISCUSSION**

6.  As people who are alive in Christ and dead to sin, what will
    believers:

> A\) refuse to do? 12-13a
>
> B\) strive to do? 13b

7.  Give some examples of how we can use our bodies in either

[The service of sin]{.ul} [The service of God]{.ul}

8.  Identify some differences between law being our master and grace
    being our master.

**[PREPARING FOR NEXT WEEK'S CLASS]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 6:15--7:6

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 103-112

3.  Read Romans 6:15--7:6 a second time but this time out loud.

How does being "under grace" change everything in life?
