---
weight: 9
title: Lesson 9
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
---

**GOD ENABLES US TO LIVE FOR HIM UNDER GRACE**

Romans 6:15 -- 7:6

**REVIEW**

> How does being "under grace" change everything in life?

**ROMANS 6:15 -- 6:18**

> Being a slave doesn't seem like a worthy goal of life. The Bible says
> we will be a slave, someone or something will control of our will and
> thoughts. Either we are controlled by our sinful nature or we are
> controlled by Jesus. The result of serving sin is death (physical and
> spiritual -- separation from God). The result of serving Jesus is
> doing God pleasing things (righteousness). The believer in the payment
> for sin that Christ made has been moved by the Spirit to be under
> Jesus' control.

**DISCUSSION**

1.  What great transformation has God worked in the life of a believer?
    (17-18)

2.  Why does Paul say, "Thanks be to God"? (17)

**ROMANS 6: 19 -- 23**

> Notice in verses 21-22 that Paul uses similar words to set up the
> contrast between the two slaveries. The benefit of serving sin is a
> sense of shame because of our previous attitudes and actions finally
> resulting in eternal separation from God (death). The believer has
> been set free from our sin and guilt through the payment of Christ. We
> willingly became slaves of God which prompted us to strive to do and
> think things that are God pleasing (holiness) and the final result is
> eternal life. Obviously our living a holy life doesn't earn the final
> result -- eternal life, that would contradict everything that
> Scripture says. Eternal life is the final benefit we receive through
> Christ.

**KEYWORD: DEATH** -- Separation 1) physical death -soul separated from
body, 2) spiritual death -- person separated from God (no relationship),
3) eternal death -- separated eternally from God

**KEYWORD:** **LIFE** -- Connected 2) physical life -- soul and body
connected, 2) spiritual life -- person connected to God (a
relationship), 3) eternal life -- eternally connected to God

**DISCUSSION**

3.  What are the huge disadvantages of being a slave to sin? (19-21,23)

4.  What are the huge advantages of being a slave to God? (19,22-23)

5.  What are some of the contrasts between the first half of verse 23
    and the second half?

**ROMANS 7: 1 -- 6**

> Paul uses an illustration to make the point that we are free from our
> old relationship with the law. A woman is bound to her husband as long
> as he is alive. If he dies, she is freed from that binding
> relationship to start a new marriage relationship with another. The
> spiritual point is that we are bound to the law, to trying to keep it
> perfectly to earn our favor with God and eternal life. Death broke
> that relationship, not our death but the death of Jesus (vs.4). His
> death payment on the cross for us frees us to a new binding
> relationship. In this new relationship with God, "we serve in a new
> way" (6). The Spirit leads us to serve the Lord. We no longer have an
> attitude, "I have to serve" or "I must serve". Our new way in the
> Spirit is, "I want to serve" or "I gladly and willingly serve".

**DISCUSSION**

6.  What happens to a believer's relationship to the law and to God
    because of saving work of Jesus?

7.  According to vs 5 what moral and spiritual conditions exist when
    people are controlled by their sinful natures?

8.  In what sense are believers "released from the law" (6)?

**[PREPARING FOR NEXT WEEK'S CLASS]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 7:7 -- 25

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 112 - 123

3.  Read Romans 7:7 -- 25 a second time but this time out loud.

Describe how we serve the Lord in the new way of the Spirit (6)?
