---
weight: 3
title: Lesson 15
author: Pastor Joel Luetke
instructor: Pastor Hannemann and Pastor Baumann
code: 202
---
ANTHROPOLOGY
A Study of Man, the Object of Salvation

Chapter 7 – Providence

Lesson 15

ALS bilingual pdf file:  Chapter 7, pages 9-19
[NPH: pages 169-176]

Introduction
In lesson 14 we began a two-part study of divine providence.  This doctrine has to do with the mysterious yet very real way by which the LORD God takes care of the world which he created.
In conclusion, we noted that “much more can be said” than was said in lesson 14.  In this lesson we will say some of the “more” which can be said.  Once again, we want to say what we can say; we want to say no more and no less than the Bible teaches us.  
The human mind – the sinfully hindered and corrupt human mind – strives to make sense of events and of life itself.  We must walk by faith and not by sight.  One day we will know as we are now known.  Until then, we walk by faith.  
Our Christian faith extends only to those things we learn in God’s Word, the Bible.  Let us strive once again to understand the word of our Lord on the matter of divine providence – and to keep our faith based on the clear words of God while we strive to avoid empty speculation.

Already covered by lesson 14:
A.	By his providence, the LORD God preserves all that he has created. 
a.	It was by God’s will [or desire] that all things came into existence.
b.	It is by his will that the Triune God preserves all things. 
B.	God provides for and protects his world by his concurrent working in us.
C.	God guards and guides everything by his governance of all things.
a.	Everything in the universe is governed by his providence
b.	Everything is governed by his providence for the good of his church
D.	We are responsible for how we use the abilities God gives to us. 
a.	God is not at fault when people, using the powers God has given to them (the “material” portion of an action), do what is evil (the “formal” portion of a human action).
b.	God is to be praised and thanked for the good things his believing people do through their God-given faith in Jesus.
.
We conclude what we can say here about divine providence:

E.	Both of the following statements are true [although they seem to contradict each other].
I	Things must happen as they do.
II	Things could happen differently.

a.	Philosophers of the world accept one or the other.

i.	Those who agree with statement “I” include

1.	The Stoics among the ancient Greeks
2.	Determinists
3.	Fatalists
4.	The adherents of Hinduism

ii.	Those who agree with statement “II” include

1.	The Epicureans among the ancient Greeks
2.	The Sadducees of Jesus’ day
3.	The Deist
4.	The Atheist of our own day

b.	Christian doctrine compels us to agree with both of these statements.

i.	[From our view of divine providence] Things must happen as they do.

Acts 4:27-28
27 Indeed Herod and Pontius Pilate met together with the Gentiles and the people of Israel in this city to conspire against your holy servant Jesus, whom you anointed. 28 They did what your power and will had decided beforehand should happen.

Acts 2:23
23 This man was handed over to you by God’s deliberate plan and foreknowledge; and you, with the help of wicked men, put him to death by nailing him to the cross. 

Matthew 26:24; 54
24 The Son of Man will go just as it is written about him. But woe to that man who betrays the Son of Man! It would be better for him if he had not been born.”
54 But how then would the Scriptures be fulfilled that say it must happen in this way?”

ii.	[From our view of human accountability] Things could happen differently.

As we noted in the previous lesson (#14), God’s foreknowledge and providential governing of all things does not remove from people their responsibility (culpability) for the wrong they do.  E.g., Judas Iscariot was not forced to betray Jesus. Judas chose to commit this sin. It was Judas who was at fault for his sin.

1.	The believer’s prayer changes things.

Isaiah 38:1-5
In those days Hezekiah became ill and was at the point of death. The prophet Isaiah son of Amoz went to him and said, “This is what the LORD says: Put your house in order, because you are going to die; you will not recover.”
2 Hezekiah turned his face to the wall and prayed to the LORD, 3 “Remember, LORD, how I have walked before you faithfully and with wholehearted devotion and have done what is good in your eyes.” And Hezekiah wept bitterly.
4 Then the word of the LORD came to Isaiah: 5 “Go and tell Hezekiah, ‘This is what the LORD, the God of your father David, says: I have heard your prayer and seen your tears; I will add fifteen years to your life.

James 5:16b-18
The prayer of a righteous person is powerful and effective.
17 Elijah was a human being, even as we are. He prayed earnestly that it would not rain, and it did not rain on the land for three and a half years. 18 Again he prayed, and the heavens gave rain, and the earth produced its crops.

2.	Human behavior changes things.

a.	Life is extended or made short by behavior

Exodus 20:12
12 “Honor your father and your mother, so that you may live long in the land the LORD your God is giving you.

Psalm 34:11-16
11 Come, my children, listen to me;
    I will teach you the fear of the LORD.
12 Whoever of you loves life
    and desires to see many good days,
13 keep your tongue from evil
    and your lips from telling lies.
14 Turn from evil and do good;
    seek peace and pursue it.
15 The eyes of the LORD are on the righteous,
    and his ears are attentive to their cry;
16 but the face of the LORD is against those who do evil,
    to blot out their name from the earth.

b.	Life is extended by nourishing the body

Acts 27:33-34
33 Just before dawn Paul urged them all to eat. “For the last fourteen days,” he said, “you have been in constant suspense and have gone without food—you haven’t eaten anything. 34 Now I urge you to take some food. You need it to survive. Not one of you will lose a single hair from his head.”

c.	Life is made brief by harming the body
 
2 Samuel 17:23
23 When Ahithophel saw that his advice had not been followed, he saddled his donkey and set out for his house in his hometown. He put his house in order and then hanged himself. So he died and was buried in his father’s tomb.

The Lord can overrule our “plans” to live long through good food and exercise. As a result, we die “young” because of his providence.  
The Lord may overrule people’s desire to end their life by suicide.  As a result, they live on for many more years because of his providence.  
On the other hand, another suicide victim dies by his/her own hand and physically fit individuals live to celebrate their 101st birthday.  Human behavior seems to be the reason these things turned out as they did.
Nevertheless, in all these examples, whether or not we perceive that divine providence was at work – divine providence was indeed at work.  At the same time, human behavior made a difference in the events that took place.  
These statements seem to contradict each other.  Both are true.  We reject all human philosophies.  “We live by faith, not by sight” (2 Corinthians 5:7).  

Conclusion
The author of God So Loved the World concludes this chapter with a section titled The Bible and Bioethics.  Because of the truth we have affirmed in this lesson, Christians want to adhere to right behavior in the matter of bioethics.  
Life is precious and protected by God.  The commandment says “You shall not murder”.  This will of God does not change by circumstances or situations.  
Our Lord wants us to regard life in the way he regards life: his precious gift to us.  By faith in Jesus, we will thank Jesus for our life and do all we can to preserve physical life in ourselves and in others. 
At the same time, we yield to the Lord’s will regarding the length of our life. We recognize that by divine providence life is ours only until the moment God determines that our life here on earth is over (Matthew 6:27; Psalm 90:3; Hebrews 9:27).  


DISCUSSION TIME

STUDENTS’ QUESTIONS 

INSTRUCTOR’S QUESTIONS


Homework
Review your notes from this lesson.  Give correct answers to the following questions.  You may also find correct answers to these questions in the book “God So Loved the World” as indicated on page 1 of this lesson.  Be ready to discuss these questions and your answers at the beginning of the next session.  
Your next exam will follow lesson 20 of this course.

1.  Relate how the following deny God’s governance of the world.

	a.  atheism

	b.  Epicureanism
	
	c.  Deism

2.  Relate how the following deny human accountability.

	a.  Stoicism

	b.  Determinism

		1.  dogmatic

		2.  fatalistic

		3.  pantheistic

3.  Demonstrate that things must happen as they do.  Acts 4:27, 28; 2:23; Matthew 26:24, 
     54.



4.   How far does God’s governance of the world extend?

	a.  Job 38:31

	b.  Job 38:22-30

	c.  Job 38:8-11

	d.  Acts 17:26; Daniel 2:20-22.

	e.  Matthew 10:29.

	f.   Jeremiah 10:23

	g.  Romans 8:28

5.  In what way may we speak of chance? 1 Samuel 6:9.  Yet, why can we say there is no chance when it comes to things happening in this world?   Isaiah 45:7.


6.  What is a miracle?  Psalm 78:12, 13, 19, 20.

7.  Identify miracles:

	a.  of grace—Ephesians 2:4,5; Romans 7:22.

	b.  in nature—Mark 4:39; Daniel 3:26, 27; 6:22, John 5:8; Romans 4:18-21.

8.  Who alone can do miracles?  Psalm 72:18.

9.  How were God’s messengers able to do miracles?  Exodus 4:21; Matthew                     
     10:8; Acts 19:11.


10. Does God permit or enable unbelievers to do miracles?  Explain.  Exodus 7:22;
      Deuteronomy 13:1-3.


11. Answer the claim that the world is a closed system and that this makes miracles impossible.
     Genesis 18:14.  Identify David Hume.


12. Comment:  All of God’s prophecies must be fulfilled.  Isaiah 44:26; Matthew 26:54. 


13.  Demonstrate that people are responsible for their own actions.  Matthew 26:24; John   
       19:12;  cf. FC Ep 11:7,8.


14.  Does prayer change things?   Isaiah 38:1-5; James 5:16.


15.  Explain:  The end of life is fixed—Job 14:5 Psalm 90:3.



16.  Explain:  People can lengthen or shorten their lives.  Isaiah 38:1-5;  Genesis 38:7, 10;
        Acts 27:33,34; 2 Samuel 17:23; 18:14; Genesis 9:6.



17.  Identify and explain two major bioethical systems.

	a.

	b.

18.  Evaluate these two systems in the light of the Bible.



19.  Explain  and evaluate the following ethical systems:

	a.  Emotivism

	b.  voluntarism

	c.  autonomism

	d.  Positivism

	e.  religious legalism

	f.  natural law ethics

	g.  proportionalism

	h.  consequentialism

	i.  situation ethics

20. Define and comment on active and passive euthanasia. 

