---
weight: 8
title: Lesson 20
author: Pastor Joel Luetke
instructor: Pastor Hannemann and Pastor Baumann
code: 202
---
ANTHROPOLOGY

A Study of Man, the Object of Salvation


Chapter 9 – Mankind


Lesson 20


ALS bilingual pdf file:  Chapter 9, pages 51-66

[NPH: pages 218-226]


Introduction

In lesson 19 we continued a 4-lesson unit on “Mankind”.  Here is an outline of what we learned about mankind in lessons 17-19: 

A.	God created Adam and Eve in his own image.

B.	We were not born with God’s image.

C.	Every human being has a body and a soul.

D.	The characteristics of the soul/spirit:

E.	All humans have descended from one man (Adam).

F.	God creates all people through the descendants of Adam and Eve.

G.	The History of the Fall

H.	The Law of God reveals our sin in order to bring us to repentance.

I.	What sin is and what sin does

J.	Original Sin

K.	Actual Sins



This lesson is the conclusion of our study of Mankind.  We will now take a look at specific “actual sins”.  



L.	Giving Offense is a sin.



a.	Jesus warns us concerning the sin of “giving offense”.



Matthew 18:6

6 “If anyone causes one of these little ones—those who believe in me—to stumble, it would be better for them to have a large millstone hung around their neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea. 



b.	It is a sin of giving offense when someone keeps people from the blessings of the gospel.



Mark 10:13-14

13 People were bringing little children to Jesus for him to place his hands on them, but the disciples rebuked them. 14 When Jesus saw this, he was indignant. He said to them, “Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 



Luke 18:15-17

15 People were also bringing babies to Jesus for him to place his hands on them. When the disciples saw this, they rebuked them. 16 But Jesus called the children to him and said, “Let the little children come to me, and do not hinder them, for the kingdom of God belongs to such as these. 17 Truly I tell you, anyone who will not receive the kingdom of God like a little child will never enter it.”



c.	It is a sin of giving offense when someone harms the faith of those who believe.



John 6:29

29 Jesus answered, “The work of God is this: to believe in the one he has sent.”



Romans 14:20-21

20 Do not destroy the work of God for the sake of food. All food is clean, but it is wrong for a person to eat anything that causes someone else to stumble. 21 It is better not to eat meat or drink wine or to do anything else that will cause your brother or sister to fall.



d.	False teachers are committing a sin of giving offense.



Romans 16:17-18

17 I urge you, brothers and sisters, to watch out for those who cause divisions and put obstacles in your way that are contrary to the teaching you have learned. Keep away from them. 18 For such people are not serving our Lord Christ, but their own appetites. By smooth talk and flattery they deceive the minds of naive people. 



Note:  For more on the subjects of giving offense and the sinful use of Christian freedom, read:  Matthew 18:1-9; Mark 9:33-37; Luke 9:46-50; Luke 17:1-3; Romans 14:1-15:3; 1 Corinthians 8; 1 Corinthians 9:22-23; Galatians 2:11-21; Galatians 5:1-15.



M.	God disciplines; Satan tempts.



a.	Our Lord does not tempt us to sin.



James 1:13

13 When tempted, no one should say, “God is tempting me.” For God cannot be tempted by evil, nor does he tempt anyone….



b.	Our Lord promises to use our difficulties to bless us.



Hebrews 12:7-10

7 Endure hardship as discipline; God is treating you as his children. For what children are not disciplined by their father? 8 If you are not disciplined—and everyone undergoes discipline—then you are not legitimate, not true sons and daughters at all. 9 Moreover, we have all had human fathers who disciplined us and we respected them for it. How much more should we submit to the Father of spirits and live! 10 They disciplined us for a little while as they thought best; but God disciplines us for our good, in order that we may share in his holiness. 



Romans 8:28

28 And we know that in all things God works for the good of those who love him, who have been called according to his purpose. 



c.	Satan (together with the sinful nature in us, and the world around us) works to lead us into sinning.



I Peter 5:8

8 Be alert and of sober mind. Your enemy the devil prowls around like a roaring lion looking for someone to devour.



James 1:14-15

14 but each person is tempted when they are dragged away by their own evil desire and enticed. 15 Then, after desire has conceived, it gives birth to sin; and sin, when it is full-grown, gives birth to death.



1 John 2:15-16

15 Do not love the world or anything in the world. If anyone loves the world, love for the Father is not in them. 16 For everything in the world—the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life—comes not from the Father but from the world. 



N.	The sin of hardening one’s heart



a.	Egypt’s Pharaoh and his officials committed this sin against the LORD.



Exodus 9:7, 34    

7 Pharaoh sent men to investigate and found that not even one of the animals of the Israelites had died. Yet his heart was unyielding and he would not let the people go. 34 When Pharaoh saw that the rain and hail and thunder had stopped, he sinned again: He and his officials hardened their hearts. 



b.	The LORD warns us not to commit this sin.



i.	God warns us with his words.



Proverbs 28:14   

Blessed is the man who always fears the LORD, but he who hardens his heart falls into trouble.  



Psalm 95:8   

Do not harden your hearts as you did at Meribah, as you did that day at Massah in the desert. 



Hebrews 3:8, 13, 15; 4:7 

8 Do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion, during the time of testing in the desert. 

13 But encourage one another daily, as long as it is called Today, so that none of you may be hardened by sin’s deceitfulness. 

15 As has just been said: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts as you did in the rebellion.” 

7 Therefore God again set a certain day, calling it Today, when a long time later he spoke through David, as was said before: “Today, if you hear his voice, do not harden your hearts.”



Ephesians 4:30

30 And do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, with whom you were sealed for the day of redemption.



ii.	God warns us with examples.



1 Corinthians 10:6

6 Now these things occurred as examples to keep us from setting our hearts on evil things as they did.



1.	Pharaoh

a.	Egypt’s Pharaoh repeatedly hardened his heart against the Word of God spoken by Moses.



Exodus 7:13

13 Yet Pharaoh’s heart became hard and he would not listen to them, just as the LORDhad said. 

Exodus 7:22

22 But the Egyptian magicians did the same things by their secret arts, and Pharaoh’s heart became hard; he would not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said. 

Exodus 8:15 

15 But when Pharaoh saw that there was relief, he hardened his heart and would not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said.

Exodus 8:19 

19 the magicians said to Pharaoh, “This is the finger of God.” But Pharaoh’s heart was hard and he would not listen, just as the LORD had said.

Exodus 8:32

32 But this time also Pharaoh hardened his heart and would not let the people go. 

Exodus 9:7

7 Pharaoh investigated and found that not even one of the animals of the Israelites had died. Yet his heart was unyielding and he would not let the people go.



b.	The LORD hardened the pharaoh’s heart.



Exodus 9:12

12 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart and he would not listen to Moses and Aaron, just as the LORD had said to Moses.

Exodus 10:1

Then the LORD said to Moses, “Go to Pharaoh, for I have hardened his heartand the hearts of his officials so that I may perform these signs of mine among them 

Exodus 10:20

20 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let the Israelites go.

Exodus 10:27

27 But the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he was not willing to let them go.

Exodus 11:10

10 Moses and Aaron performed all these wonders before Pharaoh, but the LORD hardened Pharaoh’s heart, and he would not let the Israelites go out of his country.



2.	Ananias and Sapphira 



Acts 5:1-11

Now a man named Ananias, together with his wife Sapphira, also sold a piece of property. 2 With his wife’s full knowledge he kept back part of the money for himself, but brought the rest and put it at the apostles’ feet.

3 Then Peter said, “Ananias, how is it that Satan has so filled your heart that you have lied to the Holy Spirit and have kept for yourself some of the money you received for the land? 4 Didn’t it belong to you before it was sold? And after it was sold, wasn’t the money at your disposal? What made you think of doing such a thing? You have not lied just to human beings but to God.”

5 When Ananias heard this, he fell down and died. And great fear seized all who heard what had happened. 6 Then some young men came forward, wrapped up his body, and carried him out and buried him.

7 About three hours later his wife came in, not knowing what had happened.8 Peter asked her, “Tell me, is this the price you and Ananias got for the land?”

“Yes,” she said, “that is the price.”

9 Peter said to her, “How could you conspire to test the Spirit of the Lord? Listen! The feet of the men who buried your husband are at the door, and they will carry you out also.”

10 At that moment she fell down at his feet and died. Then the young men came in and, finding her dead, carried her out and buried her beside her husband. 11 Great fear seized the whole church and all who heard about these events.



O.	Sins of weakness vs. willful sinning



a.	Sins of weakness



i.	Christians sin all the time because of the sinful nature in us.



Matthew 26:41 

Watch and pray so that you will not fall into temptation. The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. 



Romans 7:15-17,19,20    

I do not understand what I do. For what I want to do I do not do, but what I hate I do. 16 And if I do what I do not want to do, I agree that the law is good. 17 As it is, it is no longer I myself who do it, but it is sin living in me. 19 For what I do is not the good I want to do; no, the evil I do not want to do—this I keep on doing. 20 Now if I do what I do not want to do, it is no longer I who do it, but it is sin living in me that does it.



ii.	Sins of weakness are forgiven through faith in Jesus.



Psalm 19:12

12 But who can discern their own errors?
    Forgive my hidden faults.



1 John 1:7

7 But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus, his Son, purifies us from all sin.



1 Thessalonians 5:9-11

9 For God did not appoint us to suffer wrath but to receive salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ. 10 He died for us so that, whether we are awake or asleep, we may live together with him. 11 Therefore encourage one another and build each other up, just as in fact you are doing.



b.	Willful sinning is sin accompanied by unbelief.



Psalm 19:13

13 Keep your servant also from willful sins;
    may they not rule over me.
Then I will be blameless,
    innocent of great transgression.



Hebrews 10:26   If we deliberately keep on sinning after we have received the knowledge of the truth, no sacrifice for sins is left.



John 3:18

18 Whoever believes in him is not condemned, but whoever does not believe stands condemned already because they have not believed in the name of God’s one and only Son.



P.	The Sin against the Holy Spirit



a.	This sin cannot be forgiven.



Matthew 12:31-32    

And so I tell you, every sin and blasphemy will be forgiven men, but the blasphemy against the Spirit will not be forgiven. 32 Anyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but anyone who speaks against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven, either in this age or in the age to come. 



Mark 3:28-30    

I tell you the truth, all the sins and blasphemies of men will be forgiven them. 29 But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will never be forgiven; he is guilty of an eternal sin.” 30 He said this because they were saying, “He has an evil spirit.” 



Luke 12:10   

And everyone who speaks a word against the Son of Man will be forgiven, but anyone who blasphemes against the Holy Spirit will not be forgiven. 



b.	This sin cannot be forgiven because it is the sin of willfully rejecting the gospel by which sins are forgiven.



Romans 10:17

17 Consequently, faith comes from hearing the message, and the message is heard through the word about Christ.



2 Thessalonians 2:9-12

9 The coming of the lawless one will be in accordance with how Satan works. He will use all sorts of displays of power through signs and wonders that serve the lie, 10 and all the ways that wickedness deceives those who are perishing. They perish because they refused to love the truth and so be saved. 11 For this reason God sends them a powerful delusion so that they will believe the lie 12 and so that all will be condemned who have not believed the truth but have delighted in wickedness.



c.	We can examine our own hearts to see that we have faith in Jesus.  



2 Corinthians 13:5

5 Examine yourselves to see whether you are in the faith; test yourselves. Do you not realize that Christ Jesus is in you—unless, of course, you fail the test? 



d.	The person who has committed the unforgiveable sin is doomed to eternal death.



1 John 5:16   

If anyone sees his brother commit a sin that does not lead to death, he should pray and God will give him life. I refer to those whose sin does not lead to death. There is a sin that leads to death.  I am not saying that he should pray about that.



“A person who is in danger of committing the sin against the Spirit does not care about his condition. A man whose conscience is assailed by fear of having committed it certainly is not guilty of it. Proclaim to such a person the universal and all-powerful gospel of God's grace.” (Dr. John Brug, WLS Dogmatic notes)



Conclusion

The Lord loves us very much.  He proved that love for us when he lived, suffered, died and rose again to redeem us.

Our Lord wants us to remain in him through faith in his word.  Therefore our Lord warns us not to grow comfortable with sin but to live continually in repentance.  

Ultimately, only the sin of unbelief condemns (Mark 16:16).  Be on guard against every kind of sin, especially the sin of unbelief.  

Continue in the word of Jesus; let his word live in your abundantly (Colossians 3:15-16). In this way you will remain in the faith by which you will be saved.





DISCUSSION TIME



STUDENTS’ QUESTIONS 



INSTRUCTOR’S QUESTIONS





Homework

Review your notes from this lesson.  Give correct answers to the following questions.  You may also find correct answers to these questions in the book “God So Loved the World” as indicated on page 1 of this lesson.  Be ready to discuss these questions and your answers at the beginning of the next session.  

Your next exam will follow lesson 20 of this course.



1.  What is “giving offense?” Mt 18:6.





2.  How can people give offense?



	a.  Ro 16:17



	b.  Mt 18:6



	c.  1 Cor 8:9



3.  What is taking offense?  Isa 8:14





4.  Does God permit trials to come into the Christian’s life?  Explain.   Ge 50:20; Job 1:6-12.





5.  What assurance does the Lord give us concerning the trials he permits to come into our lives?



	a.  Ro 8:28



	b.  Heb 12:7-10



	c.  1 Co 10:13



	d.  2 Ti 4:18



6.  Relate what the Bible tells us about the devil’s temptations to sin.



	a.  1 Pe 5:8



	b.  1 Jn 2:15-17



	c.  Jas 1:14



7.  What is obduration?  1 Ti 4:2, Ex 8:15; Ps 95:8.





8.  What are the causes for hardening of the heart?



	a.  Eph 2:2



	b.  Ex 8:15



9.  Is all hardening of the heart terminal?  Ac 3:15, 17



10.  Why does the Bible warn against hardening our hearts?  Ps 95:7,8; 2 Co 6:2, Ac 5:5; Cf. CW 337:3.





11.  Is one sin less damning or more damning than another?  Jas 2:10; Eph 2:3, Ro 5:18, Ps 5:5.





12.  What is meant by sins of weakness?  Ro 7:18-20.





13.  Why must we also warn people that repeated, willful sinning can destroy faith?  Eph 4:30, Gal 5:19-21.





14.  Does the Bible speak of some sins being more grievous than others?  Explain.  Lk 12:47, 48; Jn 19:11; Ro 2:12-16; Mt 11:20-24.







15. What false distinction is made by Rome with regard to mortal and venial sins?





16.  What is the end result of this false distinction?  Cf. SA III III: 19-22





17.  Is any sin so terrible God cannot forgive it? 1 Ti 2:4; Jn 1:29; 3:16, 1 Jn 2:2; 2 Co 5:21.





18.  What is the sin against the Holy Spirit?  Mt 12:31,32; Luke 12:10; He 6:4-6; 10:26, 27; 1 Jn 5:16.





19.  Distinguish this sin from final impenitence (Mk 16:16), spiritual ignorance (1 Ti 1:13), or a denial of Jesus’ caused by fear (Luke 22:61, 62).





20.  Why is this called the unpardonable sin?





21.  Is this sin committed only by a fallen believer or by unbelievers who have seen and rejected the compelling evidence for Christ’s claims?







22.  What must we tell those who may be committing this sin?



23.  What will we tell those who think they have committed this sin?
