---
weight: 12
title: LESSON 12 Predestination/Election
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Hilgendorf
code: 104
lessons: 15
tags: 
--- 
OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

PREDESTINATION
WHERE IS PREDESTINATION FOUND IN THE BIBLE?
Matthew 24:22, 24, 31
2 Peter 1:10
Romans 8:29-30
Romans chapters 9-11 

EPHESIANS 1:3-14
1.	When did God choose us (predestine us) to be His people? (see v. 4 and also 2 Thessalonians 2:13 and 2 Timothy 1:9)


2.	What caused God to choose us? (see vs 5-6 and 2 Timothy 1:8-9)


3.	In verse 5 it says that our predestination was “in accordance with his pleasure and will.” What is God’s “pleasure and will?” 
•	Matthew 11:25-26 =  
•	John 6:40 =  
•	Ezekiel 33:11 =  
•	1 Timothy 2:3-4 =  
•	2 Peter 3:9 =  
•	Romans 9:18 =  
4.	How shall we react to the teaching that God has chosen us to be His own before the creation of the world? (v. 3)


5.	How are we to classify our knowledge of our election? (v. 3b)


6.	Why did God predestine us? (v. 4c)

7. So far Paul has described God choosing us before the creation of the world as a blessing which God bestowed in grace and love. Therefore, what conclusion shall we make about our election?
a. God knew ahead of time that we would be better than the rest?
b. God knew ahead of time that He would make us better than the rest?
c. God knew ahead of time that we’d be smart enough to believe?
d. That God’s grace did everything to save us, beginning with our election?


8. In v. 9 Paul writes that this subject of God’s plan to choose us is “a mystery.” Some people don’t want there to be anything mysterious about God or His purposes. It annoys them because they want their religion to be logical and explainable. But God is God, and His ways and thoughts are higher than our thoughts. After pondering God’s mysterious election, Paul wrote: “Oh, the depth of the riches of the wisdom and knowledge of God! How unsearchable his judgments, and his paths beyond tracing out! “Who has known the mind of the Lord? Or who has been his counselor?”” (Romans 11:33–34) 

9. In vs 12-13 Paul makes the contrast between two groups of people. Who are the “we” and who are the “you”?




10. “You also were included in Christ...” (v. 13) What did that mean for the Christians in Ephesus?




11. “You were marked in him (Christ) with a seal, the promised Holy Spirit.” (1:13) What is Paul describing here?




12. In v. 14 Paul writes that the Holy Spirit is “a deposit guaranteeing our inheritance.” Another term for “deposit” is “down payment.” How does this remove any doubts that God loves us and want us to be His own?



