---
weight: 13
title: LESSON 13 Faith and Good Works
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Hilgendorf
code: 104
lessons: 15
tags: 
--- 
OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

FAITH AND GOOD WORKS
	“Good works are injurious to salvation IF we depend on them for our salvation.” – Dr. Martin Luther

JAMES AND PAUL
Look at the chart below and read the cited portions of James’ letter and Paul’s letter to the Romans. Is James in conflict with Paul?


	JAMES 2:20-24 (NIV)	
	ROMANS 4:1-5 (NIV)

Do you want evidence that faith without deeds is useless? 21 Was not our ancestor Abraham considered righteous for what he did when he offered his son Isaac on the altar? 22 You see that his faith and his actions were working together, and his faith was made complete by what he did. 23 And the scripture was fulfilled that says, “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness,” and he was called God's friend. 24 You see that a person is justified by what he does and not by faith alone. 	
What then shall we say that Abraham, our forefather, discovered in this matter? 2 If, in fact, Abraham was justified by works, he had something to boast about    but not before God. 3 What does the Scripture say? “Abraham believed God, and it was credited to him as righteousness.” 4 Now when a man works, his wages are not credited to him as a gift, but as an obligation. 5 However, to the man who does not work but trusts God who justifies the wicked, his faith is credited as righteousness. 

So who is right? Paul or James? 


At what point in his life was Abraham considered “righteous” before God?
A) When he believed God’s promises. (Genesis 15:1-6)
B) When he was willing to offer his son, Isaac. (Genesis 22)


So what is James saying here about Abraham?
a)	Because Abraham was willing to offer Isaac, God justified him.
b)	Because Abraham was willing to offer up Isaac, he showed that he had justifying faith.
c)	Abraham’s willingness to offer Isaac showed that justifying faith does good works.

What is James saying in verse 24?
1)	We are saved by faith and good works, not faith alone.
2)	We are saved by good works alone.
3)	We are saved by faith alone.
4)	Faith alone is not saving faith.
5)	Saving faith is never without good works.


FAITHWORKS
Now let’s read James 2:14–18 (NIV84): 
“What good is it, my brothers, if a man claims to have faith but has no deeds? Can such faith save him? 15 Suppose a brother or sister is without clothes and daily food. 16 If one of you says to him, “Go, I wish you well; keep warm and well fed,” but does nothing about his physical needs, what good is it? 17 In the same way, faith by itself, if it is not accompanied by action, is dead. 18 But someone will say, “You have faith; I have deeds.” Show me your faith without deeds, and I will show you my faith by what I do. 

FAITH: “Can faith save him?”
•	Of course. Didn’t Jesus say to the sinful woman who anointed him with oil, “Your faith has saved you.” Didn’t Peter and John say to the jailor at Philippi, “Believe in the Lord Jesus Christ, and you will be saved?”
•	Didn’t Luther say, “Faith alone?” And hasn’t the pastor told us most every Sunday that we cannot save ourselves, no matter how many works we do, but salvation is through faith in Jesus – and only that?
•	Can faith save us? Absolutely. In fact there is no other way to be saved from our sin except through faith in Jesus and what he did on the cross.
 
WORKS: “Salvation by faith alone, but faith is never alone.”
•	What does it profit, my brethren, if someone says he has faith but does not have works? “what good is it?” – no good, its worthless.
•	“You people are so heavenly minded that you are no earthly good.”  We emphasize that salvation is by faith – and rightly so – but if we simply use that as an excuse to go about our lives without being involved in helping others and working for the good of all, then what good is our faith? 
•	Galatians 5:6 says, “The only thing that counts is faith expressing itself through love.” 
•	1 Corinthians 13:2 says: “If I have a faith that can move mountains, but have not love, I am nothing.”
•	Faith needs to express itself. If it is alive, it will be doing things. It will be functioning.

FAITHWORKS. 
The two words are together. That’s because faith in Christ and good works cannot be separated.

