---
weight: 2
title: LESSON 2 Apostolic Authority
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Hilgendorf
code: 104
lessons: 15
tags: 
--- 
OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY 

THE APOSTLES OF JESUS CHRIST
The original 12 apostles were named in Luke 6:14-16
1.	Simon (whom he named Peter), 
2.	Andrew (the brother of Simon Peter)
3.	James (son of Zebedee)
4.	John (brother of James)
5.	Philip
6.	Bartholomew (Nathanael)
7.	Matthew (the tax collector also known as Levi)
8.	Thomas (nicknamed Didymus “the twin”)
9.	James son of Alphaeus
10.	Simon who was called the Zealot
11.	Judas son of James (Thaddaeus)
12.	Judas Iscariot, who became a traitor.
In addition to these 12, there were several others:
•	Acts 1:26  __________________________
•	1 Corinthians 15:8-9  _______________________________
•	Acts 14:14 _______________________________
•	Romans 16:7  _______________________________

WHAT IS APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY?
Apostolic authority is the special authority given by Jesus Himself to those He had chosen to be His apostles. 

Apostolic Authority is ____________________________________________________
•	Mark 3:13–15; John 20:21; 2 Corinthians 5:20 

Apostolic Authority is ____________________________________________________
•	Matthew 10:40; 1 Thessalonians 4:2; Galatians 1:11–12; 1 Thessalonians 2:4; 1 Thessalonians 2:13; 1 Corinthians 14:37; 2 Peter 3:2; 2 Corinthians 10:8 


Apostolic Authority includes ____________________________________________________
•	Mark 6:7; Luke 9:1 

Apostolic Authority includes ____________________________________________________
•	Mark 16:2; Acts 5:12; 2 Corinthians 12:12; 

Apostolic Authority iincludes ____________________________________________________
•	Matthew 16:18–19; Matthew 18:18; John 20:23 

Apostolic Authority is ____________________________________________________
•	1 Corinthians 9:11–14; 1 Corinthians 9:4; 2 Corinthians 11:7–9 


HOW DO YOU KNOW WHO HAS APOSTOLIC AUTHORITY?
The apostle Paul regarded apostolic authority as absolutely critical to his ministry. See how he begins most of his epistles by referring to it:
•	Romans 1:1; 2 Corinthians 1:1; Galatians 1:1; Ephesians 1:1; Colossians 1:1 , 

There are going to be false teachers and fake apostles. The Lord warned about those who coveted this authority, and its powers. Here are two verses that refer to such imposters:
•	2 Corinthians 11:13; Revelation 2:2 

The two indications that someone has apostolic authority are:
1.	______________________________________________________________________
2.	______________________________________________________________________
•	1 Corinthians 9:2; 2 Corinthians 3:1–3 
