---
weight: 6
title: LESSON 6 Justification by Faith
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Hilgendorf
code: 104
lessons: 15
tags: 
--- 
OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

JUSTIFICATION

OBJECTIVE JUSTIFICATION
1.	Read John 1:29. Whose sins did the Lamb of God take away?

2.	Read 1 John 2:1-2. For whose sins is Jesus the atoning sacrifice?

3.	Read Romans 5:12-19, especially vv.l8-l9. Paul is com¬paring the work of two men here? Who are these two men?

4.	What was Adam’s deed? (v.18)

5.	How many people were affected by it? (v.18)

6.	How were these people affected by it? (v.18) 

7.	What was Christ’s deed? (v.18)

8.	How many people were affected by it? (v.18) 

9.	How were these people affected by it? (v.16)

Put all of these things together in the blanks of this chart:
The Doer: 		
The Deed: 		
The Recipients:		
The Result:		

10.	Read 1 Timothy 2:6. For whom did Christ give himself as a ransom?

11.	Read Romans 8:32. For whom did God deliver up his own Son?


12.	Read 2 Corinthians 5:11-19. For whom did Jesus die? (v.14-15)

13.	What does it mean when v.19 says that God “reconciled” the world to Himself? (v.19 gives the answer)


14.	To “reconcile” means “to not count men’s sins against them.” This is exactly the same as “to justify.” Who has God reconciled (justified) according to v.19?


15.	Read Romans 3:3. Does man’s reaction to the Gospel change what God has done?


SUMMARY
•	Objective justification is universal, for all people of all times and places.
•	It was accomplished at one historical point in time, namely when Christ was crucified and rose again from the dead.
•	It is independent of man’s reaction to it.
•	It is totally complete and requires no additions ever.

SUBJECTIVE JUSTIFICATION
1.	Read Mark 16:15-16. What is the “good news?” To whom is it to be preached? Who will be saved?


2.	Read Hebrews 4:2. Who heard the Gospel but did not benefit from it?


3.	Read John 1:12. What part does faith play in justification according to this verse?


4.	Read Galatians 2:16. How is a person justified?


5.	Read Romans 5:1 and Romans 3:28. How is a person justified?


SUMMARY
•	Faith is not a cause of justification, nor a condition which must be fulfilled for justification. Faith is that which receives the reconciliation pro¬claimed in the Gospel.
•	Subjective justification is also referred to as “personal justification.”
•	Subjective justification is an on-going act, taking place whenever a sinner comes to faith.


“FOR GOD SO LOVED THE WORLD THAT HE GAVE HIS ONE AND ONLY SON THAT WHOEVER BELIEVES IN HIM SHALL NOT PERISH BUT HAVE ETERNAL LIFE.”
 
