---
weight: 8
title: LESSON 8 Righteousness
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Hilgendorf
code: 104
lessons: 15
tags: 
--- 
OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

RIGHTEOUSNESS
WHAT IS RIGHTEOUSNESS?
The word “righteous” or “righteousness” occurs _____  times in the NIV (1984). 
Righteousness is ____________________ to all of God’s laws:
•	Deuteronomy 6:25 
Righteousness is equated with _______________________________________:
•	Job 4:17
•	Job 22:3 
The righteous person is the opposite of the __________________________:
•	Psalm 1:6 
Righteousness is the opposite of ________:
•	Proverbs 14:34  
The righteous are said to be ___________________________________________: 
•	Psalm 1:5
•	Proverbs 20:7 
•	Ezekiel 18:5–9
Those who _________________________________ are declared righteous:
•	Romans 2:13 
Conclusion:
•	Righteousness is the same as ___________________________________. It is ______________________ all that God says, and living in accord with God’s will.  

WHY DO WE NEED IT?
The Lord __________________________ righteousness:
•	1 Samuel 26:23
The Lord _____________________________the righteous people, hears their prayers and delivers them from trouble:
•	Psalm 34:15
•	Psalm 34:17 
•	Psalm 34:19 
Righteousness __________________________ from death:
•	Proverbs 10:2 
•	Proverbs 11:19
•	Proverbs 12:28 
•	Romans 10:5 


WHO HAS RIGHTEOUSNESS?
___________________  has righteousness
•	Psalm 143:2 
•	Ecclesiastes 7:20 
•	Romans 3:10 
Some people:



HOW DO WE ACQUIRE IT?

Not through the ______________:
•	Romans 3:20 

The ___________________________ righteousness:
•	Isaiah 61:10 

Through _______________________________:
•	Romans 3:21–22 
•	Romans 1:17 
•	Romans 4:23–24 
•	Romans 10:3–4 
•	Philippians 3:7–9 
•	Romans 4:1–16 

LUTHER’S TOWER EXPERIENCE
•	Romans 1:17
•	“I did not love, yes, I hated the righteous God who punishes sinners. Is it not enough, that God crushes us miserable sinners with His law, that He has to threaten us with punishment through the Gospel, too?”
•	His righteousness as a gift in Christ, he felt that he “was altogether born again and had entered paradise itself through open gates . . . that place in Paul was for me truly the gate to paradise.” 
•	“I extolled my sweetest word with a love as great as the hatred with which I had before hated the word `righteousness of God.' Thus that place in Paul was for me truly the gate to paradise.” 

JESUS IS OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS
•	Jeremiah 23:5–6 

Lord Jesus, You are my righteousness,
I am your sin.
You became what you were not,
that I might become what I was not. Amen.
– Martin Luther


