---
weight: 13
title: Lesson 13 Confession And The Keys Questions 261-284
author: Dr. James G. Witt, III
---
A. Carefully read and think about Questions 261-284 in the Small Catechism

B. Write down at least 5 Important Things that you discovered in your reading
1.

2.

3.

4.
 
5.


C. Agree-Disagree Questions: Read and think about each of the following Agree-Disagree statements.  Answer each statement and write a brief reason to support the answer you gave.

___ 1. In the section called Confession, God reminds us that sin is our greatest problem and that forgiveness of sins is our greatest need.


___ 2. Refusing to admit our sins to God and to others is a foolish, dishonest, attempt to avoid responsibility for the wrongs we have done, especially since God already knows all about them.


___ 3. We need to confess to people only the sins that we have committed against them or that trouble our consciences.


___ 4. We need to confess to God only the sins we can remember doing.


____ 5. Absolution is the assurance of God’s forgiveness that is spoken or verbally expressed by one of God’s people to a repentant person.


___ 6. If someone comes to us to confess a sin that is troubling him, we should do our best to assure them of God’s forgiveness and not tell anyone about the sin or sins confessed to us.


___ 7.  The Office or Ministry of the Keys is a special authority God has given His Christians to forgive sins to those who are contrite and to withhold forgiveness from those who are not contrite.


___ 8. All people should be assured that God forgives them even if they are not sorry for their sins.


___ 9. Only people who are sincerely repentant can enjoy God’s forgiveness.


___ 10.  The pastor or other called spiritual leader of the congregation publicly uses the authority of the Keys publicly on behalf of Christ and the believers in the church.


___ 11. According to God’s requirements in the Bible, only men who are personally and spiritually qualified are eligible to be Christian pastors.


___ 12. When dealing with an unrepentant sinner, God teaches us to apply His Word faithfully to that person with great love and patience.


___ 13. A Christian congregation will take the action of declaring a person to be a non-Christian (excommunication) only when it is clear that they are persistently unrepentant for their sin.


___ 14. The purpose of excommunication is to remove people with difficulty personalities from the church.


___ 15. If a person who has been removed from the congregation for unrepentant sin later does repent, they are to be forgiven and welcomed again as a believing member of the congregation.


D. Reflection Questions
1. Write a prayer of personal confession to God.



2. Select and share three Bible verses you would use to assure a repentant person that God forgives him.




3. List three sins that people may commit that might specially trouble their consciences and would be helped by personal confession to a pastor or fellow Christian.



