---
weight: 15
title: Lesson 15 The Appendix
author: Dr. James G. Witt, III
---
A. Carefully read and think about the Appendix at the back of the Small Catechism

B. Write down at least 5 Important Things that you discovered in your reading
1.

2.

3.

4.
 
5.


C. Agree-Disagree Questions: Read and think about each of the following Agree-Disagree statements.  Answer each statement and write a brief reason to support the answer you gave.

Luther’s Preface 

___ 1. In Martin Luther’s time, the level of biblical knowledge among the people of Germany was very good


___ 2. In Martin Luther’s time, the religious leaders of Germany were generally well trained in the teachings of the Bible and were very dedicated to the spiritual instruction of the members of their churches.


___ 3. In the Preface to the Small Catechism, Luther appealed to the spiritual leaders to give careful, intensive instruction in the basic doctrines of the Bible to their members, especially to children and those who were not well educated.


___ 4. Once people had learned the basic truths of the Bible, Luther encouraged the spiritual leaders to train their members to understand the deeper meaning of those truths to their lives.


____ 5. Luther also encouraged community leaders and parents to take a strong interest in the religious education of their children.


___ 6. Toward the end of his preface, Luther made a strong appeal to teach people the value and benefits of participating in Bible study.


Creeds and Confessions of the Lutheran Church

___ 7. Along with the three main Christian Creeds, the Lutheran Church accepts six other Bible-based confessional writings that are contained in the Book of Beliefs.


Luther’s Seal

___ 8. Martin Luther designed a special seal with a number of different symbols and colors for the purpose of summarizing his personal spiritual struggles.


Salvation Outline

___ 9. The seven part salvation outline with its Bible verses is useful to help lead a person to saving faith in Jesus Christ.


The Church Year

___ 10.  The Christian Church year is an interesting arrangement of the year into two major parts: the festival half that focuses on the life of Jesus Christ and the non-festival half that focuses on the life of the Church.


The Time Between The Testaments

___ 11. In the 400 year period between the Old Testament and the New Testament, the Jewish people, who carried the promise of the coming Savior, were ruled by three great world powers: the Persians, the Germans and the Romans.


___ 12. One of the significant religious projects in the time between the Testaments was the Septuagint, the translation of the 39 Old Testament books from the original Hebrew into the French language.


___ 13. During the time between the Testaments, two influential religious sects developed in Israel: the Pharisees and the Sadducees.


___ 14. Local houses of religious instruction and worship called synagogues came into existence during the time between the Testaments.


___ 15. Throughout the centuries up until the time of the New Testament, God was at work to get the world ready for the coming of the Savior.


D. Instructions For The Examination



