---
weight: 3
title:  Lesson 3 Commandments 4-8 Questions 45-62
author: Dr. James G. Witt, III
---
A. Carefully read and think about Questions 45-62 in the Small Catechism

B. Write down at least 5 Important Things that you discovered in your reading

1.

2.

3.

4.
 
5.


C. Agree-Disagree Questions: Read and think about each of the following Agree-Disagree statements.  Answer each statement and write a brief reason to support the answer you gave.

___ 1. By establishing positions of authority in institutions such as the family, the government and the church, God intends that people in those positions will use their authority to serve and bring blessings to others.


___ 2. When we respect and obey those who are in authority over us because we are Christians, we are showing love to them and also to God.


___ 3. If someone in authority over us tells us to do something that is morally wrong, we should do it anyway.


___ 4. God’s gift of earthly life is not such a valuable thing when we consider how short life is and how difficult and troubled it can be.


____ 5. Every taking of a human life is a sin against God’s command to not murder.


___ 6. As long as we leave people alone and do not bother them, we will fulfill God’s expectations of us in the Fifth Commandment.


___ 7. People should have sexual relations only with people that they truly care about.


___ 8. God gave marriage to people for their happiness.  If a married couple ceases to be happy with each other, they should get divorced.


___ 9. Homosexuality is a sinful misuse of a person’s sexuality.


___ 10. God entrusts us with the use of material possessions, but He always remains the owner of them.


___ 11. A person who steals from others not only harms them, but also insults God by implying that God is failing to give him what he thinks he deserves to have.


___ 12. A Christian should be just as concerned about the condition of another person’s possessions as he is about his own.


___ 13. In the 8th Commandment, God takes special measures to protect people’s reputations because a reputation is a very valuable thing that can very easily be damaged.


___ 14. It is proper to say damaging things about another person as long as we know that those things are true.


___ 15. Failing to speak up in defense of someone who is being unfairly attacked is wrong.


D. Reflection Questions

1. List one positive thing we should do to keep each of the Commandments in this lesson.
   
   4th Commandment:________________________________________________________

   5th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

   6th Commandment: _______________________________________________________

   7th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

   8th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

2. List one negative thing we should avoid doing to keep each of the Commandments in this lesson.
   
   4th Commandment:________________________________________________________

   5th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

   6th Commandment: _______________________________________________________

   7th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

   8th Commandment: ________________________________________________________

3. How do our efforts to obey God’s commandment help other people know more about the wonderful God that we believe and live for?

__________________________________________________________________________