---
weight: 6
title: Lesson 6 The Second Article - Jesus’ Person, Word and Humiliation Questions 114-132
author: Dr. James G. Witt, III
---
A. Carefully read and think about Questions 114-132 in the Small Catechism

B. Write down at least 5 Important Things that you discovered in your reading
1.

2.

3.

4.
 
5.


C. Agree-Disagree Questions: Read and think about each of the following Agree-Disagree statements.  Answer each statement and write a brief reason to support the answer you gave.

___ 1. Jesus is the personal name of our Savior and means “deliverer” or “rescuer”.


___ 2. Christ (Greek) or Messiah (Hebrew) is a title of a position given to Jesus by God the Father and means “Supreme Commander”.


___ 3. To believe in Jesus means to intellectually accept that Jesus is a real person who actually lived and died.


___ 4. In the person of Jesus, God has joined a human nature to the eternal divine nature of the Son.


____ 5. In His person, Jesus is 50% God and 50% human.


___ 6. Our Savior had to be a true human being so that He could take our obligation to obey God’s commands perfectly and also take our full punishment for our sins on Himself.


___ 7. Our Savior had to be true God so that He could multiply the effect of His holy life and sin-removing death and pay for the sins and salvation of all people.


___ 8. As the Christ, Jesus has faithfully served and even now continues to serve as our Prophet, High Pries and King.


___ 9. As the Prophet, Jesus carries out the work of accurately predicting people’s futures and making those futures known to us.


___ 10.  As the High Priest, Jesus offered Himself as the once-for-all perfect sacrifice for our sins and now continues His work by praying for us.


___ 11. As the King, Jesus plans to take over all earthly governments and rule a united world from His capitol city of Jerusalem for many years..


___ 12. When Jesus was in the state of humiliation, He set aside the full use of His divine powers so that He could serve us and save us.


___ 13. Jesus was conceived in the womb of His mother, Mary, by a miraculous work of the Holy Spirit.


___ 14. Before Jesus died on the cross, He did not accomplish very much that has significance for us.


___ 15. Jesus’ death on the cross demonstrated just how deeply God loves us and the great lengths to which He will go in order to save us.


D. Reflection Questions

1. Why was it necessary for Jesus to live an entire life of sinless, selfless obedience to every one of God’s commandments?



2. Why did the Son of God actually have to become a human being?  Why could He not just have appeared to be human without actually joining the human family?



3. Since Jesus is the eternal God, who has always lived and always will live, how was it possible for Him to die?



