---
weight: 7
title: Lesson 7 The Second Article - Jesus’ Redeeming Work and Exaltation Questions 133-152
author: Dr. James G. Witt, III
---
A. Carefully read and think about Questions 133-152 in the Small Catechism

B. Write down at least 5 Important Things that you discovered in your reading
1.

2.

3.

4.
 
5.


C. Agree-Disagree Questions: Read and think about each of the following Agree-Disagree statements.  Answer each statement and write a brief reason to support the answer you gave.

___ 1. As our Redeemer, Jesus humbled Himself to the point of suffering the full torments of hell so that He could pay the price that gains our freedom from spiritual and eternal slavery.


___ 2. By redeeming us from our sins, Jesus took away the power of sin to condemn us to suffer God’s punishment and to control us.


___ 3. By redeeming us from death, Jesus took away death’s power to terrorize us and to prevent us from enjoying eternal life.


___ 4. By redeeming us from the devil, Jesus took away Satan’s power to successfully find us guilty of sin and to force us to commit sin.


____ 5. As our Substitute before God, Jesus took all our sins on Himself and credited all His perfection to us.


___ 6. Jesus has redeemed all the people who have or will believe in Him as their Savior, but only them.


___ 7. When Jesus entered His state of exaltation, He again made full use of His divine powers.


___ 8. The exaltation of Jesus will end when He completes His final judgment brings the affairs of this world to a grand conclusion .


___ 9. The reason Jesus descended to hell was to give the sinful people who had previously died in unbelief another chance to hear His Word and believe in Him.


___ 10.  Jesus’ resurrection offers convincing proof that Jesus is God and that all He tells us is absolutely true.


___ 11. By raising Jesus from the dead, God the Father assures us that He has accepted Jesus’ suffering and death as the full payment for the sins of all people.


___ 12. By rising from the dead, Jesus assures us that all who believe in Him will also rise from the dead to eternal glory.


___ 13. Jesus’ ascension to the right hand of God the Father means that Jesus is sitting on a throne in heaven right beside the Father’s throne.


___ 14. When Jesus returns to the world, one of the things He will do is establish a 1,000 year, universal rule of all people.


___ 15. When Jesus carries out the final judgment, He will only judge those who are alive at that time because those who had died before this time would already have faced God for judgment.


D. Reflection Questions

1. When Jesus redeemed us, to whom did He pay the ransom price?  (Explain your answer)



2. When people are redeemed, they are set free from certain things and they are also set free for certain things.  What has Jesus Christ redeemed you for?




3. List three ways that Jesus is able to help us more now that His has entered His state of exaltation than if He had remained in His state of humiliation.



