---
weight: 12
title: Lesson 12 BAPTISM
author: Pastor Mark Lenz
instructor: Pastor Mark Lenz
code: 203
lessons: 14
---
(GSLTW pages 480-496; Chinese 2 pp. 439-454)

OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

LESSON 12 Lecture: Baptism

A. The Number of Sacraments

1. As we define and understand the term sacrament, there are only two: _________ and the _________.

    Apology XIII:17 For no levelheaded person will labor greatly about the number or the term, if only those things are still kept that have God’s command and promises.

2. The five extra “sacraments” of the _________ church lack one or more features of a true sacrament.

    a. Confirmation: a church rite that is not commanded by God and that lacks a _________.

    b. Penance: This is not the same as _________.

        AC XII Now, strictly speaking, repentance consists of two parts. 4 One part is contrition, that is, terrors striking the conscience through the knowledge of sin. 5 The other part is faith, which is born of the Gospel [Romans 10:17] or the Absolution and believes that for Christ’s sake, sins are forgiven. It comforts the conscience and delivers it from terror.

        Penance lacks every essential feature of a Sacrament.

    c. Order: Formal ordination to the ministry is not commanded; it is an _________ institution.

    d. Matrimony: Instituted by God at the beginning but does not confer spiritual blessings. Like civil government it belongs into the kingdom of power.

    Apology XIII:14-15 Marriage was not first instituted in the New Testament, but in the beginning, immediately after the creation of the human race [Genesis 1:28]. Furthermore, it has God’s command. It has also promises, not truly having to do with the New Testament, but rather having to do with bodily life. Therefore, if anyone wishes to call it a Sacrament, he or she should still distinguish it from those preceding ones. They are truly signs of the New Testament and testimonies of grace and the forgiveness of sins. 15 But if marriage has the name “Sacrament” because it has God’s command, other states or offices also, which have God’s command, may be called Sacraments, as, for example, the government.

    e. Extreme Unction: Mark 6:13; James 5:14-15 The object of the anointing with oil in the early church was not to prepare for death but to aid the sick to return to  _________.

B. The Sacrament of Baptism

1. The external element in Baptism is _________ Jn 1:33; Acts 8:36; 10:47; Eph 5:26; Jn 3:5

2. The mode of Baptism

    a. The application of water is essential Mt 28:19; Acts 10:47; Eph 5:26

    b. Water may be applied by sprinkling, pouring, washing, or _________.

3. The formula of Baptism Mt 28:19

4. Baptism is a means of grace

    a. People are made _________ in Baptism Acts 2:38; 22:16; Gal 3:27; Eph 5:26; 1 Pet 3:21

    b. Baptism works a new _________ in us Jn 3:5; Col 2:12; Tit 3:5

5. The power of Baptism. It is the Word of God, connected with the water, and the Holy Spirit that does these things.

6. Baptism is not to be repeated. Baptism once validly performed remains _________.  

    Large Catechism, Infant Baptism:77. Our Baptism abides forever. Even though someone should fall from Baptism and sin, still we always have access to it.

7. The necessity of Baptism. Jesus commanded it and it is a _________. Mt 28:19; Mk 16:16

8. The use we should make of our Baptism. The _________ _________ of our Baptism strengthens us in the faith that in Christ we are forgiven and that we are children of God.

Lesson 12 Assignment: (GSLTW pages 480-496; Chinese 2 pp. 439-454)

1. Why did Melanchthon speak of 3 sacraments?  What was his definition of a sacrament?

    Cf. quote on p. 480.

2. About how many sacraments did Luther speak?  Which were they?  What were his criteria for a sacrament?

3. Of how many sacraments does Rome speak?  Which are they?

4. Which claim, which we have to reject,  does Rome make for its number of sacraments?

5. Distinguish Rome’s sacraments from its “sacramentals.”

6. Compare the Lutheran view on the sacraments with the Catholic view with regard to:

    a.  institution

    b.  establishing validity

    c.  what they give  Cf. Ap XXIV:69, 70

    d.  how the benefit is received

7. List the three categories Rome has for its sacraments and the individual sacraments in each category.

8. Evaluate Rome’s five extra sacraments.  State what they believe concerning each.  Evaluate their belief in the light of Scripture.

    a.  Confirmation

    b.  Penance

    c.  Anointing of the sick

    d.  Marriage

    e.  Holy Orders

9. Identify similarities and differences between the Roman Catholic and Eastern Orthodox views of the sacraments.

10. Demonstrate from Scripture that baptism has the institution of Christ.  Mt 28:18-20; Acts 2:38, 41

11. Demonstrate that water is the earthly element used in baptism.  Jn 3:23, Mt 3:16, Eph 5:26.

12. What does it mean to baptize in the name of the Triune God?

13. Why is baptism valid in a Christian church, even if performed or received by an unbeliever?

14. Why do Mormons and Jehovah’s Witnesses not have a valid baptism?

15. Demonstrate that immersion is not the only valid method of baptizing. Mark 7:4

16. Demonstrate that baptism is a means of grace.  Acts 2:38; 22:16; Galatians 3:26, 27.

17. Why is baptism called:

    a.  an individual application of the word?

    b.  the visible word.  Cf. Ap XIII: 5

18. What is the daily use of baptism for the Christian?  LC Fourth Part: 44, 46
