---
weight: 14
title: Lesson 14 THE LORD’S SUPPER
author: Pastor Mark Lenz
instructor: Pastor Mark Lenz
code: 203
lessons: 14
---

(GSLTW pp. 519-533; Chinese 2 pp. 476-489)

OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

Lecture 14 The Lord’s Supper

1. The Mass of the Papacy

    a. Teaches the __________ of the elements FC VII:126 It is taught that the elements or the visible species or forms of the consecrated bread and wine must be adored. However, no one…can and will deny that Christ Himself, true God and man, is truly and essentially present in the Supper. Christ should be adored in spirit and in truth in the true use of the Sacrament, as He is in all other places, especially where His congregation is assembled.

    b. Re-enacts Christ’s __________ in an un-bloody manner Mt 26:26-27 1 Cor 11:26

    c. Offers masses for the __________  Lk 22:19 Heb 10:14,18; 9:22; 11:6; 9:27

2. The Institution of Christ

    a. “This do” addressed to __________ of Christ Acts 2:42 1 Cor 11:26

    b. “In remembrance of Me” Lk 22:19 AC XXIV:34 Because the Mass is for the purpose of giving the Sacrament, we have Communion every holy day, and if anyone desires the Sacrament, we also offer it on other days, when it is given to all who ask for it. This custom is not new in the Church.

    c. “The new testament in my blood” Lk 22:20 Mt 26:28 Jer 31:31-34 Rom 11:27 Heb 8:6-13

3. The __________ use of the Sacrament  Apology XIII:20 This use of the Sacrament consoles godly and alarmed minds. We are not speaking of a faith that only in general believes that God exists. FCVII:62 This spiritual eating is nothing other than faith. It means to hear God’s Word (in which Christ, true God and man, is presented to us, together with all benefits that He has purchased for us by His flesh given into death for us, and by His blood shed for us, namely, God’s grace, the forgiveness of sins, righteousness, and eternal life). It means to receive it with faith and keep it for ourselves. It means that in all troubles and temptations we firmly rely—with sure confidence and trust—and abide in this consolation: we have a gracious God and eternal salvation because of the Lord Jesus Christ. 1 Cor 11:26

4. Self-examination 1 Cor 11:28-32 Mt 3:8

5. Open and __________ Communion Acts 2:42 1 Cor 11:20; 10:17; 11:28

6. What should move us to receive the Sacrament frequently? Acts 2:42

    a. The __________ and invitation of Christ

    b. The promised blessings 1 Cor 10:12 Ps 38:4 Eph 6:16 1 Jn 1:7 Rom 5:1

    c. Help to lead a __________ life 1 Jn 4:19 Gal 5:6

    d. The furtherance of brotherly love Rom 3:23 1 Cor 10:17

    e. Comfort in __________ Jn 16:33 Mt 16:24

    f. To strengthen our __________ of eternal life Gal 3:26 Rom 8:17 Phil 1:23

    g. The __________ that lie heavily upon us

Lesson 14 The Lord’s Supper (GSLTW  pp. 519-533; Chinese 2 pp. 476-489)

1. Distinguish between sacramental validity and sacramental benefit.  Cf. LC Fifth Part:  14-16; 33-35

2. Through whom does the church administer the Lord’s Supper?

3. Discuss the following:

    a.  self-communion of the priest

    b.  self-communion in the Lutheran Church

4. Identify four principles which would guide isolated Christians with regard to the celebration of the Lord’s Supper when there is no pastor present.

    a.

    b.

    c.

    d.

5. Who may partake of the Lord’s Supper?  Cf. 1 Cor 11:27-32

6. What questions may a person use for self-examination before attending the Lord’s Supper?

    a.

    b.

    c.

    d.

7. In the light of 1 Cor 11:27-32, discuss the matter of communing infants or people with a mind-altering disease.

8. What is close communion, and why do we practice it?

9. Discuss the question of whether Judas was present at the Lord’s Supper on Maundy Thursday evening.

10. What was the Akron Rule of 1872?   Would we concur today with its wording?

11. Discuss communing the openly impenitent or those creating divisions in the church.

12. How frequently shall we go to the Lord’s Supper?  Why?

13. Did Luther say we should go 4 times a year?  Explain your answer.

14. Explain and refute the following Roman Catholic teachings:

    a.  transubstantiation  (note also the term “accidents”)

    b.  the sacrifice of the mass

    c.  adoration of the elements

    d.  communion under one kind and the doctrine of concomitance

    e.  ex opere operato

    f.  ex opere operantis

15. Explain and refute the following Eastern Orthodox teachings:

    a.  transubstantiation

    b.  the sacrifice of the Eucharist

    c.  intinction

    d.  deification of the believer

16. Explain the following Reformed errors:

    a.  representation

    b.  the finite is not capable of the infinite

    c.  alloeosis

17. Explain and refute the following errors:

    a.  impanation

    b.  consubstantiation
