---
weight: 5
title: Lesson 5 CONVERSION
author: Pastor Mark Lenz
instructor: Pastor Mark Lenz
code: 203
lessons: 14
---
Student Guide

OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

LESSON 5 Lecture

Scripture uses various terms to describe the change of heart that the Holy Spirit brings about in conversion:

Turning

Jer 31:18

1 Pet 2:25

Conversion

James 5:20

Ps 51:13

Enlightenment

2 Cor 4:6

Regeneration (new birth)

1 Pet 1:23

Jn 3:5

Titus 3:5

Quickening (Resurrection)

Eph 2:5-6

Rev 20:5

Repentance

1) When used with “faith” and “believe” repentance means sorrow over sin.

    Acts 20:21

    Mk 1:15

2) When used alone repentance usually includes sorrow over sin and faith in Jesus.

    Lk 15:7

    Mk 2:17

True contrition is a deep sorrow over sin.

2 Cor 7:10

Lesson 5 Student Assignment (GSLTW pp. 328-334; Chinese 2 pp. 296-302)

1. Demonstrate that conversion is resistible.  Mt 23:37, Ac 7:51

2. What was the teaching of Calvin concerning conversion?

3. Whose fault is it when people are lost?  2 Pe 2:1

4. Why is daily repentance necessary in a Christian’s life?  Ro 6:4, Mt 18:3,4, Heb 12:1, Eph 4:22-24

5. Are believers still tempted?  Explain.  Relate Luther’s comments on this matter (p. 329).

6. What is continued conversion?

7. What is the special meaning of the following terms?

    a.  Conversion

    b.  Born again Jn 3:5,6

    c.  Made alive Eph 2:5

    d.  Enlightened Eph 1:18

    e.  Called Mt 22:14, Ro 1:5,6, 8:30

    f.  Repent Lk 24:47, 15:7

8. Identify the following errors concerning conversion.  Who are the people who began them?

    What are the churches connected with them?

    a.  Pelagianism

    1.

    2.

    3.

    b.  Semi-Pelagianism

    1.

    2.

    3.

    c.  Synergism

    1.

    2.

    3.

    d.  Arminianism

    1.

    2.

    3.

9. Describe the way in which “decision for Christ” people think they come to faith.

10. Give a brief overview of the five major points of Calvin’s teaching.

 a.  Total depravity

 b.  Unconditional two pronged election

 c.  Limited atonement

 d.  Irresistible grace

 e.  Perseverance of the saints  
