---
weight: 7
title: Lesson 7 JUSTIFICATION
author: Pastor Mark Lenz
instructor: Pastor Mark Lenz
code: 203
lessons: 14
---


Student Guide

OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

LESSON 7 Lecture

The promise of forgiveness is to be accepted by faith, not by ________.

Rom 1:17

Heb 4:2

Faith is worked by the ________itself.

Rom 10:17

Faith alone justifies the sinner. The promise of forgiveness is not affected by a person’s ________.

Rom 3:3

A person has forgiveness the moment he believes he has it. This is personal or subjective justification.

Rom 4:5

________cannot make the promise of forgiveness ineffectual.

Rom 3:3

Faith is the instrument. It does not achieve or earn forgiveness of sins. It does not make a person worthy or move God to forgive sins. It is not a condition we must fulfill. Complete forgiveness rests on the work of Christ alone and is freely offered to people.

Mt 22:2-4

The function of faith is that it trusts what God offers in the ________.

Rom 3:28

• ________justification means that because of Christ God has declared the whole world justified in his sight.

• ________justification means that God imputes the effect of this declaration to all whom he brings to faith by the work of the Holy Spirit through the means of grace.

• Universal justification does not benefit anyone unless it is followed by personal justification.

Justification is a judicial act of God. God has declared people righteous because of the righteousness of Christ. It is not a moral transformation but takes place outside the sinner.

Rom 4:5-8  

The word “justify” means to ________.

Mt 12:37

Pr 17:15

Justification is not partial or progressive but ___________________.

Ps 103:3

Is 38:17

Col 2:13

Christ has atoned for all sins, and God offers forgiveness of sins for Christ’s sake alone to ___________.

1 Jn 2:2

2 Cor 5:19-20  

Forgiveness of sins is not a future blessing but a present possession. There are degrees of faith but not degrees of ________.

Lesson 7 Student Assignment (GSLTW pp. 343-349; Chinese 2 pp. 310-317)

1. Distinguish between objective and universal justification.  

    Why do we need to maintain this distinction?

2. Demonstrate that justification is objective in nature.

    a. Mt 9:2

    b. Jn 19:30

    c. Heb 10:10-14

    d. Ro 3:24-28

3. What is the role of faith in justification?  Ro 3:28

    Why do we call faith the organon leptikon?  Cf.  FC SD III: 13,14

4. Explain the following errors:

    a. God purposes to justify those who come to faith (Sandusky Declaration)

    b. Decision for Christ theology

    c. Levels of justification—Roman Catholic church

    i. Merit of congruity

    ii. Merit of condignity

    iii. What does this do to the certainty of salvation?  Cf. Ap IV: 165, 166;

    FC SD III: 30.

5. Demonstrate that sin is universal.

    a. Ge 5:3

    b. Ps 51:5

    c. Jn 3:6

    d. Eph 2:3

    e. Ro 3:23

6. Demonstrate that justification is universal in nature.

    a. Ro 3:24

    b. Jn 1:29; 3:16

    c. 2 Co 5:19-21

    d. 1 Jn 2:2

7. Demonstrate that God desires the salvation of all sinners.

    a. 1 Tm 2:4

    b. 2 Pe 3:9

    c. Eze 33:11

    d. Gen 12:3

    e. Ac 10:43

    f. Lk 2:10, 31,32

    g. Jn 3:16

    h. Mt 28:18-20

    i. Cf. FC SD XI: 28

8. Why is the doctrine of universal justification of such great comfort to us?

9. What was Calvin’s error concerning justification?

10. What is the role of faith in justification

    a. Mk 16:16

    b. Jn 3:16

    c. Ac 16:31

    d. Ro 3:22, 28; 4:5

    e. Distinguish between the organon leptikon and the organon dotikon.

11. Demonstrate that faith is the work of God.

    a. Eph 2:1

    b. 1 Co 2:14

    c. Ro 8:7

    d. 1 Cor 12:3

    e. Jn 6:44

    f. Eph 2:8

12. Is faith a good work?  Explain.  Cf. FC SD III: 13.

13. Demonstrate that unbelief loses the benefit of what Jesus did.  2 Pe 2:1

14. Is saving faith a mere historical knowledge of the facts of salvation?  Explain.  Cf. Ap IV:48.
