---
weight: 9
title: Lesson 9 ELECTION
author: Pastor Mark Lenz
instructor: Pastor Mark Lenz
code: 203
lessons: 14
---


Student Guide

(GSLTW pages 429-450; Chinese 2 pp. 392-413)

OPENING PRAYER

HOMEWORK ASSIGNMENT REVIEW

LESSON 9 Lecture: Election

1. General Statement

    “God’s eternal election, or predestination, means God’s preordaining to salvation. It does not include both the godly and the wicked, but only God’s children, who were elected and ordained to eternal life before the world’s foundation was laid. As Paul says in Ephesians 1:4–5, “He chose us in Him.… He predestined us for adoption through Jesus Christ.”

2. Proof from Scripture: 2 Tim 1:9; Eph 1:3-6; Rom 8:28-30; 2 Thess 2:13; 1 Pet 1:2; Acts 13:48

3. Election defined

    a. Election is an act of __________. Rom 9:11; 2 Tim 1:9

    b. No merit in man but only because of God’s grace in Christ. 2 Tim 1:9; Rom 11:6; Eph 1:4-6

    c. Election does not pertain to redemption or the means of grace but to __________. Eph 1:4; 2 Thess 2:13; Acts 13:48

    d. God elected certain individuals. Mt 22:14

    e. The elect are called through the __________. 2 Tim 1:9; Rom 8:28; 1 Pet 1:2; Acts 13:48; Eph 1:5; Rom 8:29; 1 Pet 1:2; Rom 8:30; Eph 1:4; Eph 2:10; Jn 10:28; Mt 24:24; Acts 13:48; 2 Thess 2:13

4. Election includes everything that leads a person to __________.

    a. 2 Thess 2:13; Rom 8:28-30; Mt 7:23; Lk 13:27; Rom 11:2; Amos 3:2

    b. “God has prepared salvation not only in general in this counsel, purpose, and ordination. In grace He has considered and chosen to salvation each and every one of the elect who are to be saved through Christ. He has also ordained that in the way just mentioned He will, by His grace, gifts, and efficacy, bring them to salvation. He will aid, promote, strengthen, and preserve them.”

    c. Faith is not a cause but the __________of election. Acts 13:48

5. How we know we are elected.

    a. From __________in Christ we infer that we are elected. Jn 3:16; Acts 13:48; 2 Tim 1:12; Mt 24:24

    b. We need to examine ourselves whether we are in the faith. 2 Cor 13:5; 2 Thess 2:13

    c. A person without faith cannot know he is elected. “We should concern ourselves with this revealed will of God. We should follow and diligently think about it. Through the Word, by which He calls us, the Holy Spirit bestows grace, power, and ability for this purpose.”

6. The __________of the doctrine of election.

    a. Rom 9:16; Rom 11:6; Mt 24:24. “This doctrine also provides the excellent, glorious consolation that God was greatly concerned about the conversion, righteousness, and salvation of every Christian. He so faithfully ‹provided for it› that even before the foundation of the world was laid, He considered it, and in His purpose ordained how He would bring me to salvation and preserve me in salvation.”

    b. We need to make use of __________to make our election sure. 2 Pet 1:10

7. The connection between the election of grace and the work of grace.

    Luther in his explanation of the third article of the Apostles Creed says: “I believe that I cannot by my own reason or strength believe in Jesus Christ, my Lord, or come to Him. But the Holy Spirit has called me by the Gospel, enlightened me with His gifts, sanctified and kept me in the true faith. In the same way He calls, gathers, enlightens, and sanctifies the whole Christian Church on earth and keeps it with Jesus Christ in the one true faith. In this Christian Church He daily and richly forgives all my sins and the sins of all believers. On the Last Day He will raise up me and all the dead and will give eternal life to me and to all believers in Christ. This is most certainly true.”

8. False teachings about election.

    a. __________teaches a double election meaning that some are elected to heaven and others to hell.

    b. __________teaches there is something in man that caused God to elect him. But the Bible excludes any role on the part of man. 2 Tim 1:9; Rom 11:6

    c. Human reason cannot harmonize the two doctrines that God wants __________to be saved and that God in his grace has elected__________to be saved. Rom 11:33

Lesson 9 Assignment: (GSLTW pages 429-450; Chinese 2 pp. 392-413)

1. Give a definition of the doctrine of election. Cf. FC SD XI: 48, 49

2. Why do we treat the doctrine of election at this point in the course?

3. Note the following points:

    a.  Election is God’s choosing people from eternity to believe in Jesus Christ.  

        Eph 1:4, John 13:18 

    b.  Election is unto faith.  Ro 8:29-30

    c.  Faith is worked and preserved through the gospel and sacraments.  Cf. FC SD

        XI: 76

    d.  Election took place in eternity—Eph 1:4; 2 Ti 1:9

    e.  Election is God’s act of choosing people to believe in Christ—Eph 1:4, Ro

        8:29, Ac 13:48, 2 Th 2:13.

    f.  Election is based on God’s grace in Christ—2 Ti 1:9, Eph 1:4-8.

    g.  Election is of individuals—Ro 8:28-30, FC SD XI:23.  What was the error of

        Samuel Huber?

    h.  There is a difference between God’s foreknowledge and God’s election—Ro

        8:28,29, FC SD XI: 4,5

    i  We cannot separate God’s election  in eternity from what God does to save us

        in time—Romans 8:28-30; Cf. FC SD XI: 14-22

    j.  Christians can be sure of their election—2 Pe 1:10; FC SD XI: 54,55; 70

    k.  If the doctrine of election does not give us comfort, we are misusing it.  FC SD

        XI: 91, 92.

    l.  Faith accepts both universal justification and election of individuals—Ro 3:24;

        Ro 8:28-30.

    m.  The doctrine of election does not lead to fatalism or spiritual over-confidence— Ro 1:16; 1 Co 10:12; FC SD XI: 12ff.

4. Identify the five major points of Calvin’s theological system.  Explain what he meant by each point.  State whether we agree or disagree with his point of view.  State why we agree or disagree with Calvin.

5. Identify the five major points of Arminian theology.  State what Arminius meant by each point.  State whether we agree or disagree with Arminius.  State also why we agree or disagree.

6. Relate how the error of election in view of faith crept into Lutheranism.

7. Relate the history and substance of the election controversy.
