---
weight: 1
title: Introduction
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Balza
tags: 
--- 
## The Gospel of John is Different
There are four accounts (gospels) of Jesus’ life and teachings in the Bible – Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. The first three accounts (Matthew, Mark, and Luke) are sometimes called “the synoptic gospels” (“synoptic” means that they take a similar view of Christ’s life) because they witness to many of the same stories (parables) and events (miracles). 

However, John’s gospel is different from the other three in many ways: 
- Ninety percent of the content of John is not found in the other three Gospels. 
- John’s gospel omits all of the events of Jesus’ birth and childhood. 
- John records none of the parables.
- John’s gospel contains only seven miracles (yet the only gospel to include the first miracle at the wedding at Cana (chapter 2) and the raising of Lazarus, chapter 11).
- There is more emphasis on the Holy Spirit in John than in any other gospel.
- John’s gospel contains the “I AM” statements of Jesus.
- John’s gospel has a prologue that is quite unique. 
- John’s gospel has the “upper room discourse” in John 14-17; the good shepherd discourse in John 10; the raising of Lazarus in John 11; and many post-Easter appearances in John 21. 

## The Author
The author identifies himself in John 21:20-24 --  “Peter turned and saw that the disciple whom Jesus loved was following them. (This was the one who had leaned back against Jesus at the supper and had said, “Lord, who is going to betray you?”) This is the disciple who testifies to these things and who wrote them down. We know that his testimony is true.” From this we can know that the writer of this gospel was one of the twelve apostles, an eyewitness of the events and dialogue which he records.

Early Christians believed that John wrote this Gospel, and the evidence seems to agree, even though the apostle John is never mentioned by name in this Gospel. He is simply called “the disciple whom Jesus loved” (13:23; 19:26; 20:2; 21:7, 20, 24). 

John was one of the first and closest disciples of Jesus and a leader in the early church, but is never mentioned by name in this Gospel—which would be natural if he wrote it, but hard to explain otherwise. He was there at the foot of the cross, and he even entered the empty tomb of Jesus. 

The author knew Jewish life well, as seen from references to popular Messianic speculations (e.g., 1:20–21), to the hostility between Jews and Samaritans (4:9), and to Jewish customs, such as the duty of circumcision on the eighth day taking precedence over the prohibition of working on the Sabbath (see note on 7:22). He knew the geography of Palestine, locating Bethany about 15 stadia (about two miles) from Jerusalem (11:18) and mentioning Cana, a village not referred to in any earlier writing known to us (2:1; 21:2). 

The Gospel of John has many touches that were obviously based on the recollections of an eyewitness—such as the house at Bethany being filled with the fragrance of the broken perfume jar (12:3). 

## Biography of the apostle John
- Son of Zebedee (and Salome?) (Mark 1:19-20)
- Brother of James.
- A fisherman on the Sea of Galilee (perhaps based in Capernaum).
- Was an acquaintance of the high priest (John 18:15-16).
- One of the 12 apostles chosen by Jesus.
- One of the “inner circle” of 3 apostles (Peter, James, and John) who were privileged to witness the raising of Jairus’ daughter (Mark 5:37), the transfiguration (Mark 9:2), and the agony in the Garden of Gethsemane (Mark 14:33).
- Entrusted with the care of Jesus’ mother (John 19:25-27).
- One of the leaders of the large Christian congregation at Jerusalem (Acts 
- Wrote one of the four gospels
- Wrote 3 short epistles of the New Testament and the book of Revelation
- Wrote 20 percent of the entire New Testament

## Date
There is no evidence in the Gospel itself as to the date of its writing. Most scholars assume that John’s was the last gospel written, and that John was aware of the other three gospels, therefore offering material not already well covered in the other three accounts. 

## The Purpose of This Gospel
The purpose of this gospel is stated in John 20:31. What is the purpose?
John states that he has written these things “so that you may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that by believing in him you will have life” (John 20:31)