---
weight: 10
title: Lesson 10 The Gospel of John, Chapter 12
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Balza
tags: 
--- 

*Jesus: The King of Israel*

We have reached the second half of John’s gospel. Previously Jesus had said that His hour had not yet come (2:4; 7:30; 8:20). But now Jesus knew the hour for his greatest act of love had come (12:23). Nearly half of the words and events recorded in the book of John occur during Holy Week, the period between Palm Sunday and Easter. 

This chapter begins on the Friday evening before Palm Sunday. Jesus and His disciples had just returned to the little Judean village of Bethany, just south of Jerusalem, where, a month earlier, Jesus had wonderfully raised Lazarus from the grave.

`	`Jesus and his disciples were gathered for supper in the house of Simon the leper (Mark 14:3), a man whom Jesus had healed from the dreaded disease of leprosy. Lazarus, and his two sisters, Mary and Martha, were also there. It was an opportunity for those people that had received so many blessings from Jesus to show their gratitude to him. 

**Read John 12:1-11 (Mary anoints Jesus)**

1. How did Lazarus, Mary and Martha honor Jesus on this occasion?





1. Why did Judas object to Mary’s offering to Jesus?




1. What insight does God’s Word give us about Judas’ objection?





1. Today many people will say they won’t go to church because it is full of hypocrites. The example of Judas reminds us there will be hypocrites among God’s people. What can we learn from both Mary and Jesus when it comes to dealing with hypocrites in the church?






1. What are some ways that we can show Mary-like devotion to our Savior and Lord?




1. According to verses 10-11 how far were the wicked religious leaders willing to go to keep their position as Israel’s leaders?





**Read John 12:12-19 (The Palm Sunday procession)**

All four of the gospels record the events of Palm Sunday, but John’s gospel is the shortest account of them, and the only account that mentions “palm” branches. The palms were an emblem of victory (Revelation 7:9), and the people sometimes carried and waved them at the feast of tabernacles (Leviticus 23:40). Now they spread them before Jesus and gave him a royal welcome. 

1. What were the people saying with each of these phrases?

“Hosanna” = 


“in the name of the Lord” = 



“King of Israel” = 



“your king is coming, seated on a donkey’s colt” = 




1. What does verse 16 teach us about the way in which Christians gain their spiritual understanding of God’s Word and will?






1. How would you describe the reaction the Pharisees had to this large, public display of support for Jesus?





**Read John 12:20-36 (Jesus predicts his death)**

This event occurred sometime during the first part of Holy Week, when Jesus was in the temple courts. The Gentiles were always treated as outsiders by the Jews, and if they came to worship in Jerusalem they had to do so from a distance in the courtyard of the Gentiles. Perhaps these Gentiles approached Phillip because they were familiar with him (He has a Greek name). Isn’t it ironic in the same chapter Jesus is identified as the King of Israel that we see here the kingdom of God passing from the Jews (exclusively) to the Gentiles?

In the Gospel of John we hear Jesus say, “I tell you the truth” a total of 24 times. Doesn’t He always tell the truth? Of course. But when Jesus begins a teaching with that statement, it indicates that something very important is about to be said so we should listen carefully. It also means that he is about to correct some misunderstanding that people have about God. We may think we know the truth (because we have our own opinions), but Jesus now tells us the REAL truth, so that we can change our thinking and learn God’s ways. 

1. Jesus preached primarily to the Jews during his public ministry. What do verses 20-21 tell us about the effects of Jesus’ work?





1. How would you explain Jesus’ parable in verse 24?







1. How does a person hate his or her life in the way Jesus is talking about?







1. What invitation, challenge and promise does Jesus make to us in verse 26?






1. What were the reasons for the Father speaking audibly from heaven in response to Jesus’ request that He glorify His name? (Verses 28-32)







1. Where are the gospel messages in the following phrases?

- “Now is the time for judgment on this world.” = 


- “Now the prince of this world will be driven out.” = 


- “When I am lifted up from the earth …” = 


- “I will draw all men to myself.” = 



**Read John 12:37-50 (The Jews continue in their unbelief)**

1. What explanation did John give concerning the unbelief of many of the Jews? (verses 37-40)





1. Why does God finally blind the eyes and deaden the hearts of those who reject him?






1. What does Jesus teach us about the relationship between God the Father and God the Son? (Verses 44-50)






1. In verses 49-50 Jesus emphasized that he spoke everything his Father commanded him to say. What comforts does this truth bring to us?






Our next lesson will take us to an upper room somewhere in Jerusalem where Jesus and his disciples celebrated the last Passover. Chapters 13 and 14 contain some of the most beautiful statements of Jesus. Enjoy the study. 
` `PAGE 1

