---
weight: 14
title: Lesson 14 The Gospel of John, Chapters 18 and 19
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: Pastor Balza
tags: 
--- 
## _Jesus: The King of the Jews_

The humiliation and death of the Son of God is found in these most sacred chapters.  Jesus&#39; courage, dignity, obedience, concern for others, and unswerving faith in the Father shine brightly in this account. Jesus is clearly not a victim of circumstances over which He had no control.

Pilate had a notice prepared and fastened to the cross.  It read &quot;JESUS OF NAZARETH, THE KING OF THE JEWS.&quot;  This sign was written in three languages. The Jewish leaders wanted Pilate to change the sign, but he refused to yield. He was weak in his response to the truth but strong when it touched personal pride.

Because of his role in these chapters, Pilate&#39;s name in every age is a name of shame. What will our names be in the annals of eternity? Because of Jesus they will be blessed. The cross became His victory --as well as ours-- since upon this instrument of torture; He triumphed over evil for all mankind.

**Read John 18:1-11** **(Jesus is arrested)**

After Jesus finished praying he and his disciples left Jerusalem and went to the Garden of Gethsemane. John did not record the details of Jesus&#39; prayers and his discussions with his disciples in Gethsemane because it was already recorded in the other three gospels. John did not need to record what had been so beautifully recorded by the other evangelists.

The betrayal of Jesus took place in the lovely garden of Gethsemane. Jesus had chosen this time and this place for the betrayal. It was no coincidence that this was the very same place that David had been betrayed by his friend Ahithophel. (see 2 Samuel 15:23, 30-31). As the &quot;Son of David&quot; and the everlasting King, Jesus would fulfill every Old Testament event that portrayed his life and ministry.

1. Even though Jesus was about to be arrested how did he display his complete control of the situation?


Peter still did not understand the divine plan which required that Jesus suffer and die for the sin of the world. He was still trying to prevent that. Luke says that two disciples were bearing swords (Luke 22:38), probably because they felt it was dangerous in Jerusalem. In Luke 22:49 we read that they asked Jesus if they should use their swords to defend Him. Peter didn&#39;t wait for an answer. Though the other gospels record that an ear was cut off, only John records the names of the two people involved, Peter and Malchus, probably because by this time it was safe to identify Peter as the swordsman, and because John was an acquaintance of the high priest.

1. Peter thought he was helping Jesus by drawing his sword. What did Jesus emphasize in his response to Peter?


1. Though Jesus would not allow Peter to defend him by drawing a sword, are there ways that we can stand up for Jesus and defend him when he is being attacked by his enemies today?

**Read John 18:12-14 and 19-24** **(Jesus is taken for trial before Annas)**

The soldiers bound Jesus and led him to Annas, the former high priest (AD 6-15) and the father-in-law of Caiaphas, the current high priest. Annas made his living by subtle forms of extortion. He practiced the fleecing of worshipers in the temple tax, the selling of animals, and the changing of coins. Jesus cleansed the temple twice, once at the beginning of His earthly ministry that we studied in John chapter 2 and the second time near the end.  When Jesus chased the moneychangers out of the temple He was hitting Annas and Caiaphas where it hurt, in their pocketbook.

False witnesses twisted Jesus words at the trial before Annas (words Jesus spoke when cleansing the temple). &quot;Destroy this temple and I will rebuild it again in three days&quot; (John 2:19-21). That was a prediction of what would now be fulfilled for our salvation.

1. How did Jesus respond to the improper treatment he received from one of the court officials?


1. What can we learn from Jesus&#39; example when we face opposition for being a follower of Jesus?


Jesus is not the only one on trial.  Each and every human being either stands with Jesus or with the world.  Is Jesus who He claimed to be or is He a liar?  The trial goes on every day when God&#39;s truth is proclaimed. People either reject Jesus or praise Him as Lord through God&#39;s gift of faith worked by His word. The verdict rendered has eternal consequences for all.

**Read John 18:15-18 and 25-27** **(Peter&#39;s denials of Jesus)**

Peter had followed those who arrested Jesus to see what would happen. In order to get as close as possible, he even gained entrance into the courtyard of the palace of the high priest. Here his faith would be put to the test. How far did Peter fall? All the way.

1. Peter had once boldly promised he would never disown Jesus even if everyone else did. (&quot;Even if all fall away on account of you, I never will&quot; – Matthew 26:33). What poor judgment did Peter now show in the courtyard of the high priest?


1. Jesus once told Peter, &quot;Simon, Simon, Satan has asked to sift you as wheat. But I have prayed for you, Simon, that your faith may not fail. And when you have turned back, strengthen your brothers&quot; (Luke 22:31–32). Now, in the courtyard, around the fire, Satan was attacking Peter. First, Satan surrounded Peter with Christ&#39;s enemies. Second, Satan isolated Peter from the support of other Christians. How does Satan use similar tactics when he attacks us today?


Peter denied Jesus when his faith was put to the test. Satan constantly tries to make us do the same thing. This event teaches us that we walk in danger all the way. None of us, no matter how determined we might be, are immune from spiritual failure. Satan knows our weaknesses. and we have many. As the apostle said, &quot;If you think you are standing firm, be careful that you don&#39;t fall.&quot; (1 Corinthians 10:12).

We must be aware of the tactics that Satan uses to &quot;sift&quot; us and make us fall. We must be diligent in watching and praying, as Jesus said, and faithful in making use of the gospel through which the Holy Spirit will strengthen and keep us in the true faith.

By the grace of God, Peter was called back to repentance and Jesus gave him another opportunity to be his witness. Peter later became one of the leaders of the early Christian church, and it is said that he eventually died a martyr&#39;s death in Rome, faithful to the end.

**Read John 18:28-40** **(Jesus trial by Pontius Pilate)**

1. Look at the conversation between the Jewish leaders and Pilate. What statements make it clear the Jews had no interest in a fair trial of Jesus (v. 30)?


1. When Pilate asked Jesus if he were a king what truths did Jesus teach the governor (v. 36)?


1. Pilate responded to Jesus with the question, &quot;What is truth?&quot; What did he mean by that? (Choose one of the answers below and explain why you chose that answer.)
a. He meant, &quot;It is not easy to determine what is truth.&quot;

b. He meant, &quot;What does truth matter?&quot;

**Read John 19:1-16** **(Jesus is sentenced to be crucified)**

1. The prophet Isaiah (53:5) once wrote of the Messiah: &quot;But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was upon him, and by his wounds we are healed.&quot; What painful and humiliating tortures did the Romans inflict on Jesus in verses 1 and 2?


Pilate hoped to satisfy the desire of the Jews to have Jesus punished and suffer. Pilate already recognized that Jesus was innocent (v.4), and so he was hoping that these beatings would satisfy the Jews and he would not have to condemn Jesus to die. This was another strategy to avoid the issue, and it did not work either. Notice how many times Pilate pronounced Jesus innocent:

- 18:38 = &quot;I find no basis for a charge against him.&quot;
- 19:4 = &quot;I find no basis for a charge against him.&quot;
- 19:6 = &quot;I find no basis for a charge against him.&quot;

1. Even an unbiased observer could tell that Jesus was an innocent man. What does it mean that He was innocent of all the charges?

Finally, the Jews said that Jesus had broken &quot;their law&quot;: _&quot;We have a law, and according to that law he must die, because he claimed to be the Son of God.&quot; (John 19:7)._ The law they were referring to was written in Leviticus 24:16 – &quot;Anyone who blasphemes the name of the Lord must be put to death. The entire assembly must stone him.&quot;

Now they are finally coming forward with the real charge against Jesus. All of the other charges were just made up, but this was their big concern. They had been accusing Jesus of blasphemy for a couple of years now, concluding that He must die, &quot;_because he claimed to be the Son of God.&quot;_ That&#39;s exactly what they had said a year earlier -- &quot;We are not stoning you for any of these,&quot; replied the Jews, &quot;but for blasphemy, because you, a mere man, claim to be God&quot; (John 10:33).

1. They were right in understanding Jesus&#39; claims. He did claim to be the Son of God. But they didn&#39;t understand what that meant. If Jesus were indeed a &quot;mere man&quot; His death would have been unnecessary, and a miscarriage of justice. But precisely because Jesus is the Son of God, He had to die. Do you agree? Why or why not?

1. Jesus was unfairly declared guilty and sentenced to death. Why should Christians not be surprised when we sometimes receive unfair treatment from secular governments?


**Read John 19:17-27** **(Jesus is crucified for the sin of the world)**

The place where Jesus was crucified had been given the nickname &quot;Place of the Skull&quot; perhaps because of the executions that were carried out there, or perhaps the place looked something like a skull. In Aramaic, the name of the place was &quot;Golgotha.&quot; The Latin term for the place was &quot;Calvary.&quot;

There on Calvary, Jesus was put in a group of three, and was placed between two notorious criminals. The implication was that Jesus was a criminal also. Guilt by association. Jesus among the sinners. That&#39;s kind of how it was for most of His ministry. His critics always complained about the company that He hung around with tax collector&#39;s and sinners. Now that was literally true. He was hanging with the sinners.

This was in keeping with God&#39;s plan. The prophet Isaiah had written: &quot;He poured out his life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors. For he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors&quot; (Isaiah 53:12).

Aren&#39;t you glad that Jesus was numbered with the transgressors? Just as in life, also in death He was willing to be associated with sinners, because that means that He is not ashamed to be associated with us. During his life Jesus had a reputation for being a friend of sinners. He ate with the despised tax collectors and spoke with the outcasts of society with whom the &quot;righteous&quot; members of society would have anything to do. Over and over they labeled Jesus as a &quot;friend of tax collectors and sinners.&quot; And so it was even in his death. He was numbered with them, willing to befriend them, willing to die for them.

Doesn&#39;t that make you glad to think about this? No matter how messed up your life has been, no matter how often you have strayed from the truth and from what is right, Jesus is not ashamed of you. He comes to eat with you, and even die for you, because he is a friend of sinners. He is the hope of sinners. He is the Savior of sinners. He is your friend, hope, and Savior.

1. Why would Pilate write the notice &quot;Jesus of Nazareth, The King of the Jews&quot; in Aramaic, Latin and Greek?


It was no accident that the identification of Him who was being crucified for the sin of the world should be written in every language used in the Mediterranean world. This was not only Pilate&#39;s idea, but God&#39;s. Here was a prophecy that the message of the cross should be proclaimed everywhere and include people of every language, culture and race.

Pilate may have intended the message of that sign to be a cruel joke, a mocking rebuke of the claims of this pitiful man. But what Pilate proclaimed in jest has become a living truth -- the truth that Jesus is King, the King who is worthy to be crowned not with thorns but with many crowns, the King of love and mercy, the King at whose precious name every knee will bow in sorrow over sin and acknowledgment of deity.

1. What was the significance of the soldiers taking Jesus&#39; clothes and dividing them among themselves?


So the soldiers thought that they would be able to profit a little from Jesus&#39; crucifixion. As far as they were concerned, the only thing that they could get from His death was a blood-stained shirt or worn out sandals. But you and I have profited much more from the crucifixion of Jesus Christ. He did not leave us with clothes, but with grace and forgiveness and peace and joy – things that money cannot purchase.

On the cross Jesus was surrounded by enemies. The soldiers who nailed Him and gambled for His clothing. Mockers, who ridiculed His claims and taunted Him. But finally, after several hours, a few friends courageously faced the danger and approached the cross. It was only five people, but what a comfort it must have been for Jesus to see His mother and some dear friends – his spiritual family -- near His cross!

One of them was his dear friend, John, one of the twelve apostles. What a relief it is to hear that! The last we heard of the disciples was that they all deserted him and fled when Jesus was arrested in the Garden of Gethsemane. Now we hear that John was at the foot of the cross. It&#39;s good to know that he was there. Through him, we have an eye-witness account of what happened and what Jesus said that day.

We also read that Jesus&#39; mother Mary was there, watching her Son suffer and die on the cross, helpless to do anything to save Him, or even to lessen His pain. What must have gone through her mind during those hours of her Son&#39;s crucifixion? Perhaps she recalled the words of old Simeon that day in the temple a little over thirty years earlier: &quot;This child is destined to cause the falling and rising of many in Israel, and to be a sign that will be spoken against, and a sword will pierce your own soul too.&quot; (Luke 2:35).

1. What lesson did Jesus teach us by providing for the care of his mother from the cross?

**Read John 19:28-37** **(Jesus dies for us)**

While he was being crucified, Jesus spoke seven times. The last words of a dying man are always important, but these seven last words of Jesus as he was dying, are even more precious to us. Two of those last sayings are recorded in these verses.

&quot;_ **I am thirsty&quot;** _ (v. 28)

1. Give two reasons why Jesus said this.

Do you remember when, in the Garden of Gethsemane, Peter drew his sword to defend Jesus against the arrest party? Jesus stopped Peter and told him, &quot;Put your sword away! Shall I not drink the cup the Father has given me?&quot; (John 18:11) This drink that God the Father had given Him was the cup of God&#39;s wrath, His anger over sin. This drink was the divine punishment for every lie and half-truth, every selfish act, every thoughtless word, every greedy lust, every unholy desire that had been thought, said or done by you and me and every sinner since the history of time.

In His incredible mercy, a mercy which we shall never fully comprehend or appreciate this side of eternity, God had given this cup filled with the fury of His anger not to us to have to drink, but to His own innocent Son! Amazing grace!

Not until all things were accomplished, not until the cup of God&#39;s wrath had been completely drained, not until every one of my sins and your sins, and the sins of the entire world had been fully paid by His suffering, did Jesus seek relief for His thirst.

&quot;_ **It is finished.&quot;** _ (v. 30)

1. When Jesus said this, what was finished?

Since Jesus has finished the work of redemption, it would be a waste of time to try to add anything. There is nothing left that we need to do, nothing left that we need to add. All is finished.

The Son of God has done everything that was needed. The redemption of your soul, and the payment of our sin is finished. This cry from the cross raises us above the uncertainty that plagues the world, who hope that they will get to heaven, but can never be sure. It is not the teaching of the Bible that we must meet God halfway or even a little part of the way. Salvation is not made up of 50% of Jesus&#39; suffering and 50% of our own good works and good intentions. The proportion is not even 99% Christ and 1% us. Christ is everything. He has finished what was needed. He paid 100%. With his dying breath He testifies that nothing needs to be added to what He has already done in order to bring you to heaven.

In the Gospel that the Savior sends us to proclaim, there are no question marks. We proclaim an accomplished fact. We preach a Gospel of full redemption. We do not add any conditions. Christ has paid for all your guilt. Believe it. Proclaim it.

The death of Jesus occurred at about 3:00pm in the afternoon on Friday. In the Jewish way of reckoning time, the new day, the Passover Sabbath, was about to begin at 6:00pm. The law of Moses in Deuteronomy 21:22-23 stated that no body was to be left hanging overnight or it would defile the land. Therefore the Jewish authorities were in a hurry to have the bodies of the crucified men removed from the crosses and placed into a grave before the Sabbath would begin. There was not much time to get the bodies into a tomb.

Therefore, because time was short, the soldiers began to break the legs of those hanging on the crosses in order to hasten their death. But it was important that Jesus&#39; legs were not broken, but rather that they pierced his side with a spear. Why? Because of two Old Testament prophecies. One prophecy said, &quot;Not one of [his bones] will be broken&quot; (Psalm 34:20). What was true of all of the Passover lambs was also true of the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world. The other prophecy stated that the people would look at the one they had pierced: &quot;They will look on me, the one they have pierced...&quot; (Zechariah 12:10).

**Read John 19:38-42** **(Jesus is buried)**

This section concludes the humiliation of our Lord but there is a hint of His exaltation as well. Jesus would not be left exposed to the world, uncovered, or heaped up with the common criminals in an unmarked grave. Yes, all His belongings were gone-- even His clothing. But in this borrowed grave we see hope.

1. What do we admire about Joseph and Nicodemus, the two men who buried Jesus, and what sad fact is revealed about them in this section?

**Summary** : In the creed we confess: &quot;I believe in Jesus Christ… suffered under Pontius Pilate, was crucified, died and was buried.&quot; It is sad to hear that Joseph and Nicodemus were secret disciples of Jesus, afraid to let others know that they were Christians. They could have defended Jesus at His trial. They could have let their light of faith shine and confessed Jesus as their Savior and Lord. Don&#39;t be secret disciples of Jesus. Don&#39;t be ashamed to speak about Him, and show your love for Him. Don&#39;t feel em­barrassed about going to church. Don&#39;t be afraid to live like a believer. Don&#39;t be a disciple in secret. Don&#39;t wait, like Joseph and Nicodemus did, to let it be known that you have faith in Christ. This world needs the Christian witness that only we can give to it. May God help us to show the courage and love for Christ now so that men may come to faith in Him through our witness.

In our next lesson, we shall rejoice in the great truth of the third day, &quot;He is risen, just as he said.&quot;