---
weight: 10
title: LESSON 10 - THE MESSIAH IS CRUCIFIED (PSALM 22)
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
THE MESSIAH IN THE WRITINGS

“Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.” (Luke 24:44–45) 

Lesson 9 = The Messiah Does God’s Will (Psalm 40)

Lesson 10 = The Messiah is Crucified (Psalm 22)

Lesson 11 = The Messiah is the Risen Lord (Psalm 16)

Lesson 12 = The Messiah is the King of Glory (Psalms 2 and 110)

THE MESSIAH IN PSALM 22

vv. 1-21 = The Messiah’s lament over his extraordinary suffering

vv. 22-31 = The Savior’s hymn of praise for his deliverance

In this psalm we find six amazing details related to Jesus’ suffering and death on Good Friday. Fill in the blanks below with those amazing details:

Verse 1 -- cp. Matthew 27:46 __________________________________________

Psalm 22:1 -- My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Why are you so far from saving me, so far from the words of my groaning?

Matthew 27:46 -- About the ninth hour Jesus cried out in a loud voice, “Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani?”—which means, “My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?”

Verse 7 -- cp. Matthew 27:39 ___________________________________________

Psalm 22:7 -- All who see me mock me; they hurl insults, shaking their heads:

Matthew 27:39 -- Those who passed by hurled insults at him, shaking their heads

Verse 11 -- cp. Matthew 26:56 __________________________________________

Psalm 22:11 -- Do not be far from me, for trouble is near and there is no one to help.

Matthew 26:56 -- But this has all taken place that the writings of the prophets might be fulfilled. Then all the disciples deserted him and fled.



Verse 15 -- cp. John 19:28 __________________________________________

Psalm 22:15 -- My tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth; you lay me in the dust of death.

John 19:28 -- Later, knowing that all was now completed, and so that the Scripture would be fulfilled, Jesus said, “I am thirsty.” 

Verse 16 -- cp. John 19:34 ____________________________________________

Psalm 22:16 -- Dogs have surrounded me; a band of evil men has encircled me, they have pierced my hands and my feet.

Luke 23:33 -- When they came to the place called the Skull, there they crucified him.

Verse 18 -- cp. Matthew 27:35 ________________________________________

Psalm 22:18 -- They divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.

Matthew 27:35 -- When they had crucified him, they divided up his clothes by casting lots.

This psalm, recorded a thousand years before the events occurred, contains detailed prophecies that were fulfilled exactly. What do all these amazing details of prophecy tell us about the passion of Christ? 


Who was actually speaking through David’s inspired pen? Before you answer, compare Psalm 22:22 with Hebrews 2:11-12,14.)




1 My God, my God, why have you forsaken me? Why are you so far from saving me, so far from the words of my groaning? 2 O my God, I cry out by day, but you do not answer, by night, and am not silent.

How would you answer Jesus’ question in verse 1? Why was He forsaken, and why was the Father so far from Him?



Jesus says that he was calling out “by day” and “by night”. When was it that Jesus prayed this – day or night? 


3 Yet you are enthroned as the Holy One; you are the praise of Israel. 4 In you our fathers put their trust; they trusted and you delivered them. 5 They cried to you and were saved; in you they trusted and were not disappointed.

Here Jesus recalls how God never forsook His people in the Old Testament, even when their iniquity was great. Can you think of some examples of this?




6 But I am a worm and not a man, scorned by men and despised by the people. 7 All who see me mock me; they hurl insults, shaking their heads: 8 “He trusts in the Lord; let the Lord rescue him. Let him deliver him, since he delights in him.” 9 Yet you brought me out of the womb; you made me trust in you even at my mother’s breast. 10 From birth I was cast upon you; from my mother’s womb you have been my God.

What must have been especially painful about the mocking and tainting that Jesus had to endure at the cross? 



11 Do not be far from me, for trouble is near and there is no one to help. 12 Many bulls surround me; strong bulls of Bashan encircle me. 13 Roaring lions tearing their prey open their mouths wide against me.

14 I am poured out like water, and all my bones are out of joint. My heart has turned to wax; it has melted away within me. 15 My strength is dried up like a potsherd, and my tongue sticks to the roof of my mouth; you lay me in the dust of death. 16 Dogs have surrounded me; a band of evil men has encircled me, they have pierced my hands and my feet. 17 I can count all my bones; people stare and gloat over me. 18 They divide my garments among them and cast lots for my clothing.

19 But you, O Lord, be not far off; O my Strength, come quickly to help me. 20 Deliver my life from the sword, my precious life from the power of the dogs. 21 Rescue me from the mouth of the lions; save me from the horns of the wild oxen.
Why does Jesus say that life is “precious”? 



22 I will declare your name to my brothers; in the congregation I will praise you.

Who is the speaker (“I”) in this verse? See Hebrews 2:11-12.



What does Jesus call us in this verse? Why is that a comfort to us?



23 You who fear the Lord, praise him! All you descendants of Jacob, honor him! Revere him, all you descendants of Israel! 24 For he has not despised or disdained the suffering of the afflicted one; he has not hidden his face from him but has listened to his cry for help. 25 From you comes the theme of my praise in the great assembly; before those who fear you will I fulfill my vows.


What does Jesus encourage us to do in verses 23 and 25?



Who is the “afflicted one” in verse 24? 



What will be “the theme of my praise in the great assembly?” (verse 25) 



26 The poor will eat and be satisfied; they who seek the Lord will praise him— may your hearts live forever! 27 All the ends of the earth will remember and turn to the Lord, and all the families of the nations will bow down before him, 28 for dominion belongs to the Lord and he rules over the nations. 29 All the rich of the earth will feast and worship; all who go down to the dust will kneel before him— those who cannot keep themselves alive.

What phrases in these verses emphasize that all people will praise the Lord for what the Messiah has done?




What great truth do the last words of verse 29 contain? 




30 Posterity will serve him; future generations will be told about the Lord. 31 They will proclaim his righteousness to a people yet unborn— for he has done it.


Who is the “They” in verse 31 who will proclaim the Savior’s righteousness?



What do we learn about the Messiah from this Psalm?







Next week we will continue to look at the amazing Messianic psalms. We will focus on Psalm 16 which proclaims that the Messiah will rise from the dead.  
