---
weight: 11
title: LESSON 11 - THE MESSIAH IS THE RISEN LORD (PSALM 16)
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
THE MESSIAH IN THE PSALMS

“Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.” (Luke 24:44–45)

- Lesson 9 = The Messiah Does God’s Will (Psalm 40)

- Lesson 10 = The Messiah is Crucified (Psalm 22)

- Lesson 11 = The Messiah is the Risen Lord (Psalm 16)

- Lesson 12 = The Messiah is the King of Glory (Psalms 2 and 110)

UNDERSTANDING THIS PSALM

What event does do both Peter and Paul say is prophesied about the Messiah in Psalm 16?

PART 1 – JESUS’ PERFECT OBEDIENCE AND SUBMISSION TO THE FATHER’S WILL (vv 1-4)

PSALM 16:1-2

Keep me safe, O God, for in you I take refuge. 2 I said to the Lord, “You are my Lord; apart from you I have no good thing.”

What being requested in this prayer (v.1)?

What thought or idea was Jesus expressing in this prayer in verse 1?

What do you think “apart from you I have no good thing” (verse 2) means?

Is this saying that all our blessings come from God?

Is this saying that nothing I do is good unless it is done for the glory of God?

How does this apply to us? Which of these statements would be an application of this verse?

“Every good and perfect gift is from above, coming down from the Father of the heavenly lights, who does not change like shifting shadows.” (James 1:17)

“Praise God from whom all blessings flow.”

“Not my will, but Thine be done. Lord, Your will for my life is always best.”

PSALM 16:3

As for the saints who are in the land, they are the glorious ones in whom is all my delight.

Who are the “saints in the land” in verse 3?

How are the saints “glorious ones” (verse 3)?

They are the recipients of glorious grace.

They do everything for the glory of God.

They have their identity in Christ, who is glorious.

How did Jesus show us that He takes delight in us (verse 3)?

PSALM 16:4

The sorrows of those will increase who run after other gods. I will not pour out their libations of blood or take up their names on my lips.

What is meant by“libations of blood” in verse 4?

What is the Messiah (Jesus) expressing with these words?

PART 2 - JESUS EXPRESSES CONFIDENCE IN THE FUTURE (vv 5-6)

PSALM 16:5

Lord, you have assigned me my portion and my cup; you have made my lot secure.

What was the “the cup” (verse 5) that the Father had assigned to Jesus?

What was “the portion” (verse 5) that God had assigned to the Messiah?

PSALM 16:6

The boundary lines have fallen for me in pleasant places; surely I have a delightful inheritance.

What is the idea behind “boundary lines” in verse 6?

PART 3 – JESUS CONFIDENCE THAT THE LORD IS WITH HIM (v 7-8)

PSALM 16:7

I will praise the Lord, who counsels me; even at night my heart instructs me.

How does the Lord “counsel and instruct” us?

PSALM 16:8

I have set the Lord always before me. Because he is at my right hand, I will not be shaken.

What does it mean that the Messiah has “set the Lord always before me”?

PART 4 - JESUS WILL RISE FROM THE DEAD AND LIVE FOREVER (V.9-11)

PSALM 16:9-10

Therefore my heart is glad and my tongue rejoices; my body also will rest secure, because you will not abandon me to the grave, nor will you let your Holy One see decay.

In verse 9 Jesus says that he “is glad and that He rests secure”. What is it that gives him joy and security?

Why can we be glad and secure even in the face of death?

PSALM 16:11

You have made known to me the path of life; you will fill me with joy in your presence, with eternal pleasures at your right hand.

Here the Messiah confesses that the Father has made “the path of life” known to him. What is the “path of life”?

What is Jesus foretelling with the words “joy in your presence, eternal pleasures at your right hand”?

What do we learn about the Messiah from this Psalm?

Next week we will complete our study of the Messiah in the Old Testament as we examine two wonderful psalms (Psalm 2 and Psalm 110) which proclaim the Messiah’s ultimate victory and rule over all things.
