---
weight: 12
title: LESSON 12 - THE MESSIAH IS THE KING OF GLORY (PSALM 2 AND PSALM 110)
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE PSALMS

“Everything must be fulfilled that is written about me in the Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms.” (Luke 24:44–45) 

- Lesson 9 = The Messiah Does God’s Will (Psalm 40)
- Lesson 10 = The Messiah is Crucified (Psalm 22)
- Lesson 11 = The Messiah is the Risen Lord (Psalm 16)
- Lesson 12 = The Messiah is the King of Glory (Psalms 2 and 110)

## PSALM 2
1)	Many Psalms have superscriptions that identify the human author. But Psalm 2 has no superscription. Nevertheless, we may know who the human author is. Read Acts 4:23-29. According to Peter in this inspired account, who is the human author of Psalm 2?


REBELLION AGAINST GOD’S ANOINTED KING (v. 1-3)

1Why do the nations conspire and the peoples plot in vain? 
2The kings of the earth take their stand and the rulers gather together against the LORD and against his Anointed One. 
3“Let us break their chains,” they say, “and throw off their fetters.”

2)	Who is the “Anointed One” of verse 2? (See Acts 4:25-28)

3)	These verses speak of people who conspire and plot against the Lord and his Messiah. The rebels include “kings of the earth” and “rulers.” Who are these people? See Acts 4:5,6,27

4)	When people rebel against the Lord they are also rebelling against the Anointed One (see John 10:30 – “I and the Father are one.”) In verse 1 the psalmist asks “why” those people were plotting and rebelling against the Lord’s Messiah? Can you give any reasons? 

GOD’S ANGRY REBUKE OF THE REBELLIOUS (v.4-6)

4The One enthroned in heaven laughs; the Lord scoffs at them. 
5Then he rebukes them in his anger and terrifies them in his wrath, saying, 
6“I have installed my King on Zion, my holy hill.”
5)	What is comforting about the fact that God laughs and scoffs at the efforts to oppose his work? (verse 4)

6)	What effect will God’s reply have on those who rebel (verse 5)?

THE RULE OF THE ANOINTED ONE (v.7-9)

7I will proclaim the decree of the LORD: He said to me, “You are my Son; today I have become your Father. 
8Ask of me, and I will make the nations your inheritance, the ends of the earth your possession. 
9You will rule them with an iron scepter; you will dash them to pieces like pottery.”

7)	Who is “the Son” referred to in verse 7? See Acts 13:32-33; Hebrews 1:5; Hebrews 5:5

8)	In verse 7 the Father says, “today I have become your Father.” What day is “today”?

9)	What is the “iron scepter” in verse 9?


THE ADMONITION TO US ALL (v.10-12)

10Therefore, you kings, be wise; be warned, you rulers of the earth. 
11Serve the LORD with fear and rejoice with trembling. 
12Kiss the Son, lest he be angry and you be destroyed in your way, for his wrath can flare up in a moment. Blessed are all who take refuge in him. 
10)	In verse 12 we are advised to “kiss the Son.” What does that mean? 

11)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this psalm? 

PSALM 110

Title: “Of David. A psalm.” 

12)	Who wrote Psalm 110? 

VERSE 1

1The LORD says to my Lord: “Sit at my right hand until I make your enemies a footstool for your feet.” 

13)	Who is the second “my Lord” in verse 1?

14)	Who does Peter identify as the “Lord of David” (Acts 2:29-36)? 

15)	What does it mean to “sit at the right hand” (verse 1)? (see Ephesians 1:20-21)

16)	What does it mean that “your enemies are a footstool for your feet”?

VERSE 2

2The LORD will extend your mighty scepter from Zion, saying, “Rule in the midst of your enemies!” 

VERSE 3

3Your troops will be willing on your day of battle. Arrayed in holy splendor, your young men will come to you like dew from the morning’s womb. 

17)	While verse 2 speaks of Jesus’ enemies submitting, this verse speaks of the willing submission of the Messiah’s “troops.” Who are the “troops”? 

18)	What is the “day of battle”? 

VERSE 4

4The LORD has sworn and will not change his mind: “You are a priest forever, in the order of Melchizedek.” 

19)	This prophecy is in the form of an oath. By swearing an oath, what is the Lord indicating? 

20)	In verse 3 the Messiah was said to be a king. But now in this prophecy there is a new piece of information about the Messiah. In verse 4 this “Lord of David” is said to be a _________________

21)	Why was this so unusual and strange for the Messiah to be both a King and a Priest? 

22)	Who is Melchizedek? (see Genesis 14:17–20) 

VERSES 5-6

5The Lord is at your right hand; he will crush kings on the day of his wrath. 6He will judge the nations, heaping up the dead and crushing the rulers of the whole earth. 

23)	What day is being prophesied in these verses?

VERSE 7

7He will drink from a brook along the way, and so he will lift his head high. 

24)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this Psalm?