---
weight: 2
title: LESSON 2 THE MESSIAH IS PROMISED TO ADAM AND EVE
author: Pastor Robert Balza
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

This lesson is the first of three lessons that will examine the Messianic prophecies in the writings of Moses (sometimes called the Torah or the Law). The three lessons will be:

Lesson 2 = The Messiah is Promised to Adam and Eve

Lesson 3 = The Messiah is Promised to Abraham 

Lesson 4 = The Messiah is Promised to the Children of Israel

## THE FIRST MESSIANIC PROPHECY 

GENESIS 3:15 

1)	What is the context of this verse? 

“SO THE LORD GOD SAID TO THE SERPENT…” 

GENESIS 3:14

“So the LORD God said to the serpent, “Because you have done this, “Cursed are you above all the livestock and all the wild animals! You will crawl on your belly and you will eat dust all the days of your life.” 

2)	What did God call the serpent in 3:1?

3)	In 3:14 God is talking to the serpent. Write down a Bible reference that teaches us that the serpent was actually Satan: 

“You will crawl on your belly” (Genesis 3:14)

4)	What is the significance of “crawling on your belly”?

“you will eat dust all the days of your life.”

5)	What is the significance of “eating dust”? (see Micah 7:17; Isaiah 49:23; Psalm 72:9)

## SNAKES OR SATAN?

6)	Was God cursing an animal or cursing Satan? 

## VERSE 15

“And I will put enmity between you and the woman, and between your offspring and hers; he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel.”” (Genesis 3:15)

“I will put enmity between you and the woman” 

7)	What is “enmity”? (see Numbers 35:21-22; Ezekiel 25:15; Ezekiel 35:5)

8)	Who will God direct ENMITY toward? 

“and between your offspring and hers”.  

9)	Who are the “offspring” of Satan? (see Matthew 13:38-39; John 8:44; 1 John 3:8-13)

10)	Who are the “offspring” of the woman? 

“he will crush your head, and you will strike his heel.” 

11)	In this phrase “he” refers to only one person, one descendant of the woman. What is remarkable about the fact that this person of called the offspring of a WOMAN (and not a MAN)? (see Galatians 4:4)

12)	Whose head will be crushed? And what is the significance of that? (see 1 John 3:8; Romans 16:20)

13)	What is the meaning of the phrase “and you will strike his heel”?

## PROTEVANGELIUM

14)	What is the meaning of the word “protevangelium”?

15)	When did God decide to do what he promises in this verse? (see 1 Peter 1:20)

16)	What does this verse tell us about God?