---
weight: 2
title: LESSON 3 THE MESSIAH IS PROMISED TO ABRAHAM
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

This lesson is the second of three lessons that will examine the Messianic prophecies in the writings of Moses (sometimes called the Torah or the Law). The three lessons will be:

- Lesson 2 = The Messiah is Promised to Adam and Eve
- Lesson 3 = The Messiah is Promised to Abraham 
- Lesson 4 = The Messiah is Promised to the Children of Israel

---

## THE CALL OF ABRAM – GENESIS 12:1-7 
1.	What three things did the Lord ask of Abram (verse 1)? 

&nbsp;

2.	What was God doing with these instructions?  

&nbsp;

3.	What were the 8 promises God made to Abraham in Genesis 12:1-7?

    1. (v.2) 
    2. (v.2) 
    3. (v.2) 
    4. (v.2) 
    5. (v.3) 
    6. (v.3) 
    7. (v.3) 
    8. (v.7) 

&nbsp;

### “I will make you into a great nation” (v.2) 
4.	What did God mean by “great?”

&nbsp;

### “I will bless you” (v.2) 
5.	Why did God choose to bless Abraham? 

&nbsp;

### “I will make your name great” (v2) 
6.	How did this promise give purpose to Abraham’s life?

&nbsp;

### “you will be a blessing” 
7.	How would Abraham be a blessing to others?

&nbsp;

### “I will bless those who bless you” (v.3) 
8.	Give an example of this.

&nbsp;

### “whoever curses you I will curse” (v.3) 
9.	Give an example of this.

&nbsp;

### “all peoples on earth will be blessed through you” (v.3) 
10.	Why do we believe that this was a Messianic promise (a promise of a Savior)? (see Acts 3:24-26) 

&nbsp;

11.	How will the Messiah bring blessings to all people? 

&nbsp;

### Galatians 3:6-8
12.	What does Paul call this promise to Abraham?

&nbsp;

13.	How are the blessings of the promise received?

&nbsp;

14.	When the words “all nations” who was God referring to? 

&nbsp;

15.	Was the way of salvation any different for Abraham than it is for us?  

&nbsp;

16.	How, then, would Abraham and his family share the blessing with other families of the earth? 

&nbsp;

### John 8:56 
17.	What did Jesus mean? How did Abraham “see His day”? How did he “rejoice in it”? 

&nbsp;

## GENESIS 12:7 “to your offspring”
18.	Where is Shechem?  

&nbsp;

19.	What does this promise reveal about the Messiah?  

&nbsp;

---

## THE PROMISE REPEATED – GENESIS 13:14-18 
Circle the promises originally given to Abraham in 12:1-7 that were repeated here:

   1. I will make you a great nation
   2. I will bless you
   3. I will make your name great
   4. I will make you a blessing to others
   5. I will bless those who bless you
   6. I will curse those who curse you
   7. I will bless all people on earth through you and your descendants
   8. To your offspring I will give this land.

Why did Abraham keep building altars to the Lord?

&nbsp;

---

## THE PROMISE CONFIRMED BY A COVENANT – GENESIS 15:1-21 
20.	What is a covenant?

&nbsp;

21.	How many covenants did God make during the Old Testament (and with whom)? 

&nbsp;

---

## THE PROMISE REPEATED – GENESIS 17:1-8 
22.	What is the significance of the phrase “father of many nations”?

&nbsp;

---

## THE PROMISE REPEATED AGAIN– GENESIS 18:17-19 

---

## THE PROMISE REPEATED – GENESIS 22:15-18 