---
weight: 4
title: LESSON 4 - THE MESSIAH IS PROMISED TO THE CHILDREN OF ISRAEL
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE WRITINGS OF MOSES

This is the final lesson that on the Messianic prophecies in the writings of Moses (sometimes called the Torah or the Law). The three lessons are:

- Lesson 2 = The Messiah is Promised to Adam and Eve
- Lesson 3 = The Messiah is Promised to Abraham 
- Lesson 4 = The Messiah is Promised to the Children of Israel

## THE LION OF JUDAH – GENESIS 49:8-12

{{< bible "Genesis 49:8–12" " “Judah, your brothers will praise you; your hand will be on the neck of your enemies; your father’s sons will bow down to you. 9 You are a lion’s cub, Judah; you return from the prey, my son. Like a lion he crouches and lies down, like a lioness—who dares to rouse him? 10 The scepter will not depart from Judah, nor the ruler’s staff from between his feet, until he to whom it belongs shall come and the obedience of the nations shall be his. 11 He will tether his donkey to a vine, his colt to the choicest branch; he will wash his garments in wine, his robes in the blood of grapes. 12 His eyes will be darker than wine, his teeth whiter than milk." "NIV" >}}
 
1)	What five blessings was Judah promised?
1.	v. 8 
2.	v. 8 
3.	v.9 
4.	v.10 
5.	v. 11-12 

&nbsp;

2)	In verse 9 Judah is spoken of as a lion: “You are a lion’s cub, O Judah; you return from the prey, my son. Like a lion he crouches and lies down, like a lioness    who dares to rouse him?” What is signified by this?

&nbsp;

3)	What is a scepter (“the scepter will not depart from Judah”)? 

&nbsp;

4)	Who were some of the kings that were descended from Judah?

&nbsp;

5)	Why do we believe that this section is a Messianic prophecy? (see Revelation 5:5 and Revelation 19:15-16)

&nbsp;

6)	So what do we now know about the Messiah? 

&nbsp;

## A STAR OUT OF JACOB - NUMBERS 24:15-19   

{{< bible "Numbers 24:15–19" " Then he spoke his message: “The prophecy of Balaam son of Beor, the prophecy of one whose eye sees clearly, 16 the prophecy of one who hears the words of God, who has knowledge from the Most High, who sees a vision from the Almighty, who falls prostrate, and whose eyes are opened: 17 “I see him, but not now; I behold him, but not near. A star will come out of Jacob; a scepter will rise out of Israel. He will crush the foreheads of Moab, the skulls of all the people of Sheth. 18 Edom will be conquered; Seir, his enemy, will be conquered, but Israel will grow strong. 19 A ruler will come out of Jacob and destroy the survivors of the city.”" "NIV" >}}

7)	Who was Balaam, and when did he utter this prophecy?

&nbsp;

8)	In his fourth oracle, Balaam said that the Lord led him to see someone who would come “not now” (v.17) but sometime in the future. How was this person described in Balaam’s vision (verses 17-19)? 

&nbsp;

9)	Who was Balaam referring to? 

&nbsp;

## THE STAR AND THE RULER 
10)	How did these men know about the birth of a new king in Israel? 

&nbsp;

11)	Why did those magi (star observers) want to come and worship this particular Jewish king? 

&nbsp;

12)	Who was Peter talking about when he wrote of the “morning star?” (Revelation 22:16)

&nbsp;

## A PROPHET LIKE MOSES - DEUTERONOMY 18:15-19 

{{< bible "Deuteronomy 18:15–19" " The LORD your God will raise up for you a prophet like me from among you, from your fellow Israelites. You must listen to him. 16 For this is what you asked of the LORD your God at Horeb on the day of the assembly when you said, “Let us not hear the voice of the LORD our God nor see this great fire anymore, or we will die.” 17 The LORD said to me: “What they say is good. 18 I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their fellow Israelites, and I will put my words in his mouth. He will tell them everything I command him. 19 I myself will call to account anyone who does not listen to my words that the prophet speaks in my name." "NIV" >}}

13)	How do we know that this passage was a reference to Jesus? (see Acts 3:19-22)

&nbsp;

14)	Moses said that the Prophet would be “like me.” How was Jesus like Moses?

&nbsp;
