---
weight: 5
title: LESSON 5 - THE MESSIAH IN ISAIAH PART 1
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE PROPHETS

There will be four lessons on the Messianic prophecies in the writings of the prophets:

- Lesson 5 = The Messiah in Isaiah Part 1
- Lesson 6 = The Messiah in Isaiah Part 2 
- Lesson 7 = The Messiah In the Major Prophets
- Lesson 8 = The Messiah in the Minor Prophets

We can identify at least 18 Messianic prophecies in Isaiah:

1.	Isaiah 2:1-5 = The Messiah as the refuge of the people
2.	Isaiah 4:2 = The Messiah is the Branch of the Lord
3.	Isaiah 7:14 = The Messiah is born of a virgin
4.	Isaiah 8:17-18 = The Messiah trusts in God
5.	Isaiah 9:1-7 = The Messiah is the heir to the throne of David
6.	Isaiah 11:1-5 = The Messiah as the stump from Jesse
7.	Isaiah 24:21-26 = The triumph of the Messiah
8.	Isaiah 28:16 = The Messiah as the precious cornerstone
9.	Isaiah 30:19-26 = The Messiah as teacher

	++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

10.	Isaiah 40:11 = The Messiah as the Good Shepherd
11.	Isaiah 42:1-7 = The Messiah’s ministry
12.	Isaiah 49:1-9 = The Messiah as the light for the Gentiles
13.	Isaiah 50:4-11 = The Messiah is rejected
14.	Isaiah 52:13-53:12 = The Messiah as suffering Servant
15.	Isaiah 55:3-5 = The Messiah’s unfailing gifts promised to David
16.	Isaiah 59:16 = The Messiah completes the mission alone
17.	Isaiah 61:1-2 = The Messiah proclaims good news
18.	Isaiah 63:1-6 = The Messiah as conqueror

THE VIRGIN’S SON - ISAIAH 7:11-14

{{< bible "Isaiah 7:11–14" " “Ask the LORD your God for a sign, whether in the deepest depths or in the highest heights.” 12 But Ahaz said, “I will not ask; I will not put the LORD to the test.” 13 Then Isaiah said, “Hear now, you house of David! Is it not enough to try the patience of humans? Will you try the patience of my God also? 14 Therefore the Lord himself will give you a sign: The virgin will conceive and give birth to a son, and will call him Immanuel." "NIV" >}}

1)	Who was the Lord speaking to in these verses? (verse 13)

2)	What was the historical background of these verses? 

3)	What would be the consequences if the kings of Syria and Samaria were successful in this plot? 

4)	As Ahaz is inspecting the water supply, probably in preparation for a siege, what does the Lord, through Isaiah, tell him is the only real solution to the crisis in Isaiah 7:9?

5)	Nevertheless, what did King Ahaz regard as the solution to his problem? See 2 Kings 16:7-9 

6)	Why did the Lord offer a sign to the people of Judah?

7)	Why did Isaiah tell king Ahaz that his refusal to ask for a sign was “trying the patience of the Lord” (verse 13)? 

8)	What is the meaning of the Hebrew word “almah” (virgin)?

9)	So what do we now know about the Messiah from this prophecy? 

10)	Why is the doctrine of the virgin birth an essential part of the Christian faith?

## LIGHT FOR THE GENTILES – ISAIAH 9:1-7  

{{< bible "Isaiah 9:1–7" " Nevertheless, there will be no more gloom for those who were in distress. In the past he humbled the land of Zebulun and the land of Naphtali, but in the future he will honor Galilee of the nations, by the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan— 2 The people walking in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of deep darkness a light has dawned. 3 You have enlarged the nation and increased their joy; they rejoice before you as people rejoice at the harvest, as warriors rejoice when dividing the plunder. 4 For as in the day of Midian’s defeat, you have shattered the yoke that burdens them, the bar across their shoulders, the rod of their oppressor. 5 Every warrior’s boot used in battle and every garment rolled in blood will be destined for burning, will be fuel for the fire. 6 For to us a child is born, to us a son is given, and the government will be on his shoulders. And he will be called Wonderful Counselor, Mighty God, Everlasting Father, Prince of Peace. 7 Of the greatness of his government and peace there will be no end. He will reign on David’s throne and over his kingdom, establishing and upholding it with justice and righteousness from that time on and forever. The zeal of the LORD Almighty will accomplish this." "NIV" >}}

11)	Where are Zebulon and Naphtali?

12)	Why will the inhabitants of Zebulon and Naphtali no longer be gloomy, but filled with joy (verse 3)? 

13)	What four names are given to the Messiah in verse 6?

14)	What will Messiah’s reign be like according to verse 7? 

**Matthew 4:12-17, 23**

{{< bible "Matthew 4:12–17" " When Jesus heard that John had been put in prison, he withdrew to Galilee. 13 Leaving Nazareth, he went and lived in Capernaum, which was by the lake in the area of Zebulun and Naphtali—14 to fulfill what was said through the prophet Isaiah: 15 “Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali, the Way of the Sea, beyond the Jordan, Galilee of the Gentiles— 16 the people living in darkness have seen a great light; on those living in the land of the shadow of death a light has dawned.” 17 From that time on Jesus began to preach, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven has come near.”" "NIV" >}}

{{< bible "Matthew 4:23" " Jesus went throughout Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the good news of the kingdom, and healing every disease and sickness among the people." "NIV" >}}

15)	What do we learn about the Messiah from the prophecy of Isaiah 9:1-7?

## THE ROOT OF JESSE – ISAIAH 11:1-10 

{{< bible "Isaiah 11:1–10" " A shoot will come up from the stump of Jesse; from his roots a Branch will bear fruit. 2 The Spirit of the LORD will rest on him— the Spirit of wisdom and of understanding, the Spirit of counsel and of might, the Spirit of the knowledge and fear of the LORD— 3 and he will delight in the fear of the LORD. He will not judge by what he sees with his eyes, or decide by what he hears with his ears; 4 but with righteousness he will judge the needy, with justice he will give decisions for the poor of the earth. He will strike the earth with the rod of his mouth; with the breath of his lips he will slay the wicked. 5 Righteousness will be his belt and faithfulness the sash around his waist. 6 The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. 7 The cow will feed with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox. 8 The infant will play near the cobra’s den, the young child will put its hand into the viper’s nest. 9 They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the LORD as the waters cover the sea. 10 In that day the Root of Jesse will stand as a banner for the peoples; the nations will rally to him, and his resting place will be glorious." "NIV" >}}

16)	Verse 1 says that Jesse’s tree has been cut down, leaving only a stump. When did this take place?  

17)	Verse 1 talks about someone that it calls “a shoot” or a “Branch” and a “Root of Jesse.” Who is this? 

18)	How does the prophecy describe the Branch from Jesse’s tree?

19)	What’s the significance of the belt or sash?

20)	Notice that the prophet says that this will be the situation on “my holy mountain.” What mountain is he referring to? 

21)	What is the message of this picture? 

22)	What is the “banner” that will stand as the rallying point for people of every nation? (See John 12:31-33) 

23)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this section?