---
weight: 6
title: LESSON 6 - THE MESSIAH IN ISAIAH PART 2
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE PROPHETS

There will be four lessons on the Messianic prophecies in the writings of the prophets:

- Lesson 5 = The Messiah in Isaiah Part 1
- Lesson 6 = The Messiah in Isaiah Part 2 
- Lesson 7 = The Messiah In the Major Prophets
- Lesson 8 = The Messiah in the Minor Prophets

In this lesson we will select two of the Messianic prophecies in the last half of Isaiah:
1.	Isaiah 40:11 = The Messiah as the Good Shepherd
2.	Isaiah 42:1-7 = The Messiah’s ministry
3.	Isaiah 49:1-9 = The Messiah as the light for the Gentiles
4.	Isaiah 50:4-11 = The Messiah is rejected
5.	Isaiah 52:13-53:12 = The Messiah as suffering Servant
6.	Isaiah 55:3-5 = The Messiah’s unfailing gifts promised to David
7.	Isaiah 59:16 = The Messiah completes the mission alone
8.	Isaiah 61:1-2 = The Messiah proclaims good news
9.	Isaiah 63:1-6 = The Messiah as conqueror

## THE MESSIAH’S MINISTRY - ISAIAH 42:1-7

{{< bible "Isaiah 42:1–7" " “Here is my servant, whom I uphold, my chosen one in whom I delight; I will put my Spirit on him, and he will bring justice to the nations. 2 He will not shout or cry out, or raise his voice in the streets. 3 A bruised reed he will not break, and a smoldering wick he will not snuff out. In faithfulness he will bring forth justice; 4 he will not falter or be discouraged till he establishes justice on earth. In his teaching the islands will put their hope.” 5 This is what God the LORD says— the Creator of the heavens, who stretches them out, who spreads out the earth with all that springs from it, who gives breath to its people, and life to those who walk on it: 6 “I, the LORD, have called you in righteousness; I will take hold of your hand. I will keep you and will make you to be a covenant for the people and a light for the Gentiles, 7 to open eyes that are blind, to free captives from prison and to release from the dungeon those who sit in darkness." "NIV" >}}

1)	The term “servant of the Lord” is used to refer to many different people in the Bible. Look at these passages and identify “the servant of the Lord.”

- Genesis 26:24 
- Deuteronomy 34:5 
- 2 Samuel 7:8 
- Luke 1:38 
- James 1:1 
- Isaiah 41:8-9  

2)	Who is being called “God’s servant” in Isaiah 42:1-7? See Matthew 12:15-21.

3)	Agree or disagree: To be a “servant of the Lord” does not imply inferior status or lesser importance. 

4)	The New Testament identifies Jesus as a “servant.” How was Jesus the Lord’s servant in these verses? 

- “[Jesus Christ] made himself nothing, taking the very nature of a servant, being made in human likeness. And being found in appearance as a man, he humbled himself and became obedient to death— even death on a cross!” (Philippians 2:7–8)

- “The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus. You handed him over to be killed, and you disowned him before Pilate, though he had decided to let him go.” (Acts 3:13)

5)	Point out words and phrases in these verses (42:1-7) that indicate the Messiah was not coming only to help and save the Jews.

6)	Agree or disagree: Each of us is a servant of the Lord. 

7)	What special mission or task has God chosen us for?

8)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this prophecy? 

## THE SUFFERING SERVANT -  ISAIAH 52:13-53:12

{{< bible "Isaiah 52:13–53:12" " See, my servant will act wisely; he will be raised and lifted up and highly exalted. 14 Just as there were many who were appalled at him— his appearance was so disfigured beyond that of any human being and his form marred beyond human likeness— 15 so he will sprinkle many nations, and kings will shut their mouths because of him. For what they were not told, they will see, and what they have not heard, they will understand. 53:1 Who has believed our message and to whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed? 2 He grew up before him like a tender shoot, and like a root out of dry ground. He had no beauty or majesty to attract us to him, nothing in his appearance that we should desire him. 3 He was despised and rejected by mankind, a man of suffering, and familiar with pain. Like one from whom people hide their faces he was despised, and we held him in low esteem. 4 Surely he took up our pain and bore our suffering, yet we considered him punished by God, stricken by him, and afflicted. 5 But he was pierced for our transgressions, he was crushed for our iniquities; the punishment that brought us peace was on him, and by his wounds we are healed. 6 We all, like sheep, have gone astray, each of us has turned to our own way; and the LORD has laid on him the iniquity of us all. 7 He was oppressed and afflicted, yet he did not open his mouth; he was led like a lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep before its shearers is silent, so he did not open his mouth. 8 By oppression and judgment he was taken away. Yet who of his generation protested? For he was cut off from the land of the living; for the transgression of my people he was punished. 9 He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death, though he had done no violence, nor was any deceit in his mouth. 10 Yet it was the LORD’s will to crush him and cause him to suffer, and though the LORD makes his life an offering for sin, he will see his offspring and prolong his days, and the will of the LORD will prosper in his hand. 11 After he has suffered, he will see the light of life and be satisfied; by his knowledge my righteous servant will justify many, and he will bear their iniquities. 12 Therefore I will give him a portion among the great, and he will divide the spoils with the strong, because he poured out his life unto death, and was numbered with the transgressors. For he bore the sin of many, and made intercession for the transgressors." "NIV" >}}

9)	What does the phrase “so will he sprinkle many nations” (v.15) teach us? (See Hebrews 9:19-22)

10)	Give a few examples of occasions when Jesus “was despised and rejected by men” (verse 3).

11)	What does the phrase “yet we considered him stricken by God, smitten by him, and afflicted” (verse 4) mean? 

12)	According to this verse, what was the main mission for which this Servant was chosen? 

13)	When you read the phrase, “he was led like a lamb to the slaughter” what Biblical picture comes to mind? 

14)	Isaiah 53:9 reads: “He was assigned a grave with the wicked, and with the rich in his death.” Describe how this was fulfilled. 

15)	In Isaiah 53:10 what is the lesson of these words: “Yet it was the LORD’s will to crush him and cause him to suffer … the LORD makes his life a guilt offering”?

16)	In Isaiah 53:10-11 the prophecy says: “he will see his offspring and prolong his days. After the suffering of his soul, he will see the light of life and be satisfied.” What truth is being taught in these phrases?

17)	The last half of verse 11 reads: “by his knowledge my righteous servant will justify many, and he will bear their iniquities.” What does the phrase “by his knowledge” mean? 

18)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this prophecy?

That brings us to the end of our study of the Messianic prophecies in the prophet Isaiah. Next week we will look at some of the most important Messianic prophecies in the Major prophets.  