---
weight: 7
title: LESSON 7 - THE MESSIAH IN THE MAJOR PROPHETS
author: Pastor Robert Balza
instructor: "Pastor Robert Balza"
code: 107
lessons: 12
tags: 
  - OT
---
## THE MESSIAH IN THE MAJOR PROPHETS

1.	Jeremiah 23:5-6 = The Lord our Righteousness

2.	Jeremiah 30:9,21 = The Messiah as the priestly king

3.	Jeremiah 31:15 = The massacre of infants

4.	Jeremiah 33:15-16 = The Lord Our Righteousness

5.	Ezekiel 17:22-24 = The Messiah as the tender sprig

6.	Ezekiel 21:25-27 = The Messiah as the rightful king

7.	Ezekiel 34:11-16, 23, 24 = The Messiah as Good Shepherd

8.	Ezekiel 37:15-28 = The Messiah as the great unifier of nations

9.	Daniel 7:13-14 = The Son of Man

10.	Daniel 9:24-27 = The Messiah as anointed ruler


THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS – JEREMIAH 23:5-6

{{< bible "Jeremiah 23:5–6" " “The days are coming,” declares the LORD, “when I will raise up for David a righteous Branch, a King who will reign wisely and do what is just and right in the land. 6 In his days Judah will be saved and Israel will live in safety. This is the name by which he will be called: The LORD Our Righteous Savior." "NIV" >}}

1)	When did Jeremiah write these words?

2)	What other verses in Jeremiah are almost exactly the same as these verses?

3)	What do the first words of this prophecy, “The days are coming” (23:5) indicate?

4)	What “Branch” is the prophet writing about with the words, “I will raise up to David a righteous Branch, a King who will reign wisely”?

5)	Name some people, other than Jesus, who are “righteous”?

6)	Even though all these people are called “righteous”, are they righteous people because they have lived a perfect life? (see Psalm 51:5; Psalm 143:2; Job 25:4; Ecclesiastes 7:20; Isaiah 64:6; Romans 3:10; Romans 3:23)

7)	How were they righteous? (see Hebrews 11:4; Hebrews 11:7; Galatians 3:6; Hebrews 11:31; Romans 4:6; Habakkuk 2:4)

8)	What are the two ways in which the Bible uses the terms “righteous” and “righteousness”?

9)	Describe the LAW usage of the terms “righteous” and “righteousness”:

10)	Describe the GOSPEL usage of the terms “righteous” and “righteousness”:

11)	What is the Messiah called in verse 6?

12)	What is the way of righteousness?

13)	What do we now know about the Messiah from this prophecy?

a)	

b)	

c)	


THE SON OF MAN -  DANIEL 7:13-14

{{< bible "Daniel 7:13–14" " “In my vision at night I looked, and there before me was one like a son of man, coming with the clouds of heaven. He approached the Ancient of Days and was led into his presence. 14 He was given authority, glory and sovereign power; all nations and peoples of every language worshiped him. His dominion is an everlasting dominion that will not pass away, and his kingdom is one that will never be destroyed." "NIV" >}}

14)	In verse 9 the “Ancient of Days,” seated on the throne, is introduced. Who is this? (see 7:9 and 7:22)

15)	In his night vision Daniel sees “one like a son of man.” Literally, the phrase is “one like the son of a human being.” Who is this? See John 9:35-37.

16)	According to this prophecy, how will the Son of Man come to us? (see also Matthew 24:30; Matthews 26:65)

17)	What will the Messiah’s kingdom be like according to this prophecy? (see also Matthew 28:18; Revelation 7:9,11; Philippians 2:9-11; Luke 1:32-33)

18)	What do we learn about the Messiah from this prophecy?

Next week we will look at some of the most important Messianic prophecies in the “minor” prophetic books.  