---
weight: 10
title: 第十课 当我们还在与罪争战的时候神赐给我们最终的得胜
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
attach: 110/Lesson-10-Romans-Bilingual.docx
---

Romans 7:7 -- 25

罗马书 7:7 -- 25

**REVIEW回顾**

Describe how we serve the Lord in the new way of the Spirit. (6)

说明我们将如何以圣灵的新样来服事主（第6节）

**ROMANS 罗马书 7: 7 -- 12**

Paul said "the sinful passions aroused by the law were at work in our
bodies" (7:5). The perverse natural mind of a human might conclude that
the problem is with the law of God. Since it is God's law, God is the
problem. I certainly am not to blame! Paul exposed this whole line of
thought as totally wrong. Paul said "sin" is the problem. Later in vs
18, he calls it our sinful nature. In Ephesians 4:22 he calls it our old
self. The sinful nature we all inherited from our parents is what is
leading us astray. It rebels against God's holy law.

Paul uses himself as an example. He refers back to an earlier time of
his life when he was an active Pharisee. He believed God's law only
spoke about outward actions. He honestly thought he wasn't in any danger
before God (vs 9). He even summarized his attitude then, "as for
legalistic righteousness, faultless" (Philippians 3:6). Then he became
aware that even desires and thoughts can be sinful. Suddenly his sinful
nature was prompting all kinds of sinful thoughts and desires. His point
-- the law doesn't create sin and death, our sinful nature is the
culprit. The law is good. It only intends to benefit a person. He will
teach us more about our sinful nature in the next section.

保罗说，"那因律法而生的恶欲就在我们肢体中发动"（7:5）悖逆的人性会认为问题在于神的律法。并且因为律法是从神而来，那么神才是产生问题的原因。绝不该怪我！保罗阐明这一系列的想法是完全错误的。保罗说"罪"才是核心问题。之后在18节中，他将之成为"罪性sinful
natural"（译注：罪性sinful
natural为英文NIV的翻译，和合本圣经译为"肉体"）在以弗所书4:22节中称之为"旧人"。罪性是我们从父母遗传得来的，使我们步入迷途。罪性抵挡神的圣洁律法。

保罗用自己为例。他重提自己早年做积极的法利赛人的生活。那时，他笃信神的律法只在乎外在的行为。他真以为自己可以坦然活在神面前（9节）。他甚至这样总结他当时的"就律法上的义说，我是无可指摘的"
(腓立比书3:6)
。接下来，当他意识到意念和思想也会犯罪。立时，他的罪性就产生除了无数有罪的思想和意念。他的观点可以总结为------律法本身并不会制造罪和死亡。我们的罪性才是罪魁祸首。律法是好的。律法本是对人有益的。保罗将在下一节中对我们的罪性展开更多的教导。

**DISCUSSION讨论**

1\. What important purpose does the law fulfill? (vs7-11)

律法要成就什么重要目的？(7-11节)

2\. How does the sinful nature respond to this helpful purpose the law
of God offers us? (vs.8,11)

律法本来是要帮助我们，罪性是如何回应的？（8，11节）

3\. What are some of the deceptive rationalizations sin proposes to
trick us into violating God's law?

罪会怎样诱惑我们的理性进而使我们违反神的律法？

**ROMANS 罗马书7:13-20**

In this section my English Bible (NIV84) has the word "I" twenty-one
times. There isn't any reason from the text to assume anything but the
obvious, Paul is speaking about himself. In this section Paul uses the
present tense completely. He is describing himself as he is; a converted
and we can certainly say mature believer. Yet he knows there is a dark
power at work within him. His sinful nature (vs 18) is still very
powerful and active in his heart and life. Living "in this new way of
the Spirit" (6) doesn't mean that the sinful nature is eliminated from
the believer. Paul's personal experience is the same that the Roman
Christians were experiencing, there is a daily struggle with the sinful
nature in a believer. While Paul takes personal responsibility for his
continued imperfections (notice the "I"s), he also says that the culprit
is the sinful nature within him. Every believer, no matter how mature we
are or new to the faith that we are, will have that conflict within us.
Our sinful nature will continue to resist the Spirit and its leading of
our life.

在这一节中，我所用的英文圣经（NIV84）中，"我"字出现了21次（译注，本节在和合本中，有27次提及"我"）。事实再清楚不过了，保罗在说他自己。在本节中，保罗完全使用现在时的时态。他在描述他现在的真实状况，就是一个转变了的，甚至完全可以说是一个成熟的信徒。尽管如此，他清楚的知道有黑暗的势力在他里面做工。他的罪性（译注：和合本译为肉体）（18节）仍然很强大，并且活跃在他的心里和生活中。"要按着心灵的新样"而活并不意味着信徒就不再有罪性了。保罗的个人经历和罗马基督徒一样，在信徒里面每天都有着与罪性的争战。保罗坦承自己一直处在不完全的状况下（注意"我"字），同时，他指明罪魁就是他里面的罪性。每一个信徒，无论是多么成熟或是新信徒，都会在我们里面有着同样的挣扎。我们的罪性会一直不断的抵挡圣灵和圣灵对我们生命的引导。

**KEYWORD -- SINFUL NATURE** -- A mind and heart incline only toward
evil, inherited from Adam

关键词 -- 罪性 -- 从亚当而来只会屈服于罪恶的心思意念。

\- **NEW MAN, INNER BEING --** New heart and mind created by the Holy
Spirit by faith in Jesus, Delights in doing God's will and fights
against the sinful nature

新人， 我里面的意思（22节） --
新的心思意念，藉着耶稣里的信心由圣灵所造，喜悦遵行神的旨意并与罪性争战。

**DISCUSSION讨论**

4\. Explain what it means for a person to recognize sin as "utterly
sinful." (vs.13)

请解释，认出罪是"恶极了"是什么意思？（13节）

5\. What great conflict does Paul portray in vs. 14-20?

保罗在14-20节中描绘了怎样的挣扎？

6\. What insights about a believer's sinful nature do we gain in vs.
14-20?

我们在14-20节中得到关乎信徒罪性的哪些启示？

7 What insights about a believer's spiritual nature do we gain in vs.
14-20?

我们在14-20节中得到关乎信徒属灵生命的哪些启示？

**ROMANS 罗马书7: 21 -- 25**

Every moment of everyday, a believer in Jesus has two competing
principles at work within him or her. Our inner being and the sinful
nature are not at all compatible. Paul portrays it as a war being waged
within each of us. It is a war of control over our heart and life.
Battles that are too frequently won by the sinful nature. Paul express a
frustration with himself and a despair because he finds himself
violating God's will. He knows what the consequences are -- death (24).
He can't change his sinful nature nor can he live a perfect life. He
pleads for rescue and reminds himself and all believers that Jesus is
the answer. He is our ongoing Rescuer and Savior. As Martin Luther said,
we are saint and sinner simultaneously.

每时每刻，在耶稣里的信徒都有两个互相竞争的原则活在他（她）里面。我们里面的意思和罪性是完全不相容的。保罗将之描绘为在我们每个人里面的争战。这是关乎掌控我们心灵和生活的争战。常常地，罪性占得上风。保罗表达出对自己的失败的沮丧因为他意识到他在违背神的旨意。他知道这样的结局------就是死（24节）。他并不能改变自己的罪性也不能活出完全的生命。他寻求救赎并提醒自己和所有的信徒只有耶稣是我们的答案。祂一直是我们的救赎主。如马丁路德所说，我们同时有着圣徒和罪人的身份。

**DISCUSSION讨论**

8\. What does Paul's use of the present tense throughout today's study
emphasize to us?

保罗在今天的学习内容中一直使用进行时态，这对我们有什么提醒？

9\. Why shouldn't the believer be surprised that he or she still
struggles with sin?

为什么信徒不该为自己还会受到罪的困扰而感到惊讶？

10\. How does a Christian find spiritual relief from the struggle with
our sinful nature? 25

基督徒怎样从我们与自己罪性的争战中找到属灵的释放？25节

11\. What benefits are there in having a good understanding of the
struggle that goes on between the sinful and believing nature of a
Christian?

对基督徒内心中罪性和新性情的争战有如此了解会有什么益处？

**[Preparing for next week's class预备下周的课程]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 8:1 -- 16 阅读罗马书8:1 -- 16

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 123 -- 133
    阅读罗马书------大众圣经读本123 -- 133页

3.  Read Romans 8:1 -- 17 a second time but this time out loud.
    再次大声朗读罗马书8:1 -- 16

How is Paul's teaching about the sinful nature and the new inner being
in the believer confirmed in your own life?

保罗关于信徒的新旧性情的教导如何在你自己的生命中得以证明？
