---
weight: 5
title: 第五课 神藉着在耶稣里的信心施行救赎，两个旧约的例子
author: Pastor Kenneth Kratz
instructor: Pastor Karl Gurgel
code: 110
translator: volunteer
lessons: 12
attach: 110/Lesson-5-Romans-Bilingual.docx
---

**TWO OLD TESTAMENT EXAMPLES**

Romans 4:1 -- 15

罗马书4:1 -- 15

**REVIEW 回顾**

Review Scripture and be prepared to talk about how Jesus life, death and
resurrection resulted in God declaring everybody not guilty before him.

回顾圣经准备好分享耶稣的生命，死亡与复活如何使我们得以在神面前被称为无罪。

**ROMANS 4:1 -- 8 罗马书 4:1 -- 8**

Paul previously said that the Old Testament, the law and the prophets
(3:21) testified that we are acquitted before God through faith. Now he
gives two examples. Abraham, the father of the nation and David, the
great king of the nation are used to emphasize the point.

保罗曾说旧约，就是律法和先知（3:21）见证我们是藉着信心在神面前被宣告无罪。现在保罗给我们举出两个例子。亚伯拉罕，以色列人的先祖和大卫，以色列人伟大的王，以这两人来强调这一点。

In the case of Abraham Paul says he had nothing to brag about before
God. If he had done even just a small part to earn his acquittal, he
would have something to brag about. That isn't how Abraham was cleared
of all wrong doing before God. In the context of Genesis 15, God told
Abraham a child would come from his own body and a nation so numerous
would follow that they would be like the stars in the sky. Previously
God had promised that the Savior would come from his family line (Gen.
12:3). Abraham simply believed what God said. Paul quotes word for word
the passage from Gen. 15:6. The word translated "credited" (vs 3) is
used frequently in business transactions. It involves putting something
on a person's account as a credit. Notice God put it on Abraham's
account, Abraham didn't put it on his account. God put on Abraham's
account, "acquitted, cleared of all sin, not guilty". What did Abraham
do? Nothing -- he just believed what God said to him.

保罗说亚伯拉罕在神面前没有任何可以自夸的，如果他哪怕是作出一点点功绩来赢得无罪的话，他就有所自夸的了。但这并不是亚伯拉罕在神面前得以称义的方法。在创世记15章中，神告诉亚伯拉罕说一个孩子将要从他而出，将要成为一个大国，并且国民要好像天上的星一样多。之前神曾应许救主将要从他的家中降生（创12:3)
。亚伯拉罕单单相信神的话。保罗一字一句的引用创世记15章6节的话，第三节中翻译为"算为"的字在希腊文里常在商业交易中使用。这个字的含有加在某人的账户上作为信用额度的意思。注意是神加在亚伯拉罕的账户上，亚伯拉罕没有加在自己的账户上。神给亚伯拉罕的账户里加上"无罪，清除所有的罪行，不算为有罪"亚伯拉罕做了什么呢？什么也没有------他只是单单相信神告诉他的话。

There are two ways to get a credit on your account. One can work for it
or it can be given. God acquitted the non-worker (vs 5). It was a gift
given to the one who trusts God. Notice it describes God as the one "who
justifies the wicked." It doesn't say the believer but the wicked. We
are all wicked before God by nature aren't we? The wicked, the entire
mass of humanity, were acquitted, declared not guilty. The one who
believes God's statement receives that forgiveness

有两种方法可以给你的账户中增加信用。或是做工而得或是被赐予。神宣布那不做工（5节）的为无罪的。这是赐给那信靠神之人的礼物。注意这里将神描述为"称罪人为义的神"这里没有说信徒而是说罪人。我们在神面前在本性里都是罪人，不是吗？罪人，就是整个人类，被宣告无罪，不算为有罪。所有信神的话的人能得着这样的赦免。

David provides the same lesson. This is a quote from Psalm 32:1-2. David
starts with a generalization and then in the following verses explains
how he tried to hide his sin, but then confessed it and the forgiveness
God was proclaimed to him. In the quote David is simply saying how happy
a person is who knows their transgressions and sins are forgiven. He
speaks of "transgressions" -- many lawless acts a person has done in
their life. He speaks of "sins" -- many failures to fall short of what
God demands. God forgave, covered them. Any sin in the future, God will
not count against them. All of this happens simply through faith in
God's word of acquittal. Both are held up as examples of Old Testament
believers, none more prominent that Abraham and David, who were declared
not guilty before God simply through faith.

大卫也证明了同样的教训。这里引用了诗篇32:1-2节的经文。大卫先以一句话概括然后在接下来的经文里解释他曾如何尝试隐藏自己的罪，藉着承认自己的罪之后得着神赐给他的赦免之恩。在引用的经文里，大卫只是告诉我们一个人得知自己的罪过得以被赦免将会多么的喜乐。他提到
"赦免其过" ------"过" 是指人在生命中所有不合法的行为。他也提到
"遮盖其罪" ------ "罪"
是因指不能达到神的要求所产生的失败。神赦免遮盖了这一切。所有将犯的罪神也不算在他头上。这些能够实现都是靠着相信神宣告无罪的话语。这些作为旧约信徒的例子，著名的亚伯拉罕和大卫，都是藉着信心在神面前被宣告无罪。

**DISCUSSION 讨论**

1\. How are wages and a gift different and how does that apply to our
spiritual life?

工价和礼物有什么不同，对于我们的属灵生命来讲有什么意义？

2\. What does Scripture teach about how Abraham became righteous before
God?

圣经是如何说亚伯拉罕在神面前被称为义的？

3\. How does Paul stress that righteousness is a pure gift from God? Vs
5

保罗如何在第5节中强调义完全是从神而来的礼物？

4\. What is the difference in meaning of the words transgressions and
sins? Vs 7

第7节中的"过"和"罪"有什么区别？

5\. How do vs 7-8 support the truth that God credits righteousness apart
from works?

第7-8节如何说明神在行为以外算人为义的真理？

**ROMANS 4:9 -- 12 罗马书 4:9 -- 12**

Paul made the point that Abraham and David were both cleared of all
wrongdoing before God simply through faith in the Messiah. Since both of
them were Jews, he wants to be sure that a wrong impression isn't given.
He refers to Abraham. He was credited with being acquitted of all
wrongdoing long before he was ever circumcised. Circumcision came nearly
20 years later. Circumcision was a sign, a seal, that in an outward way
reminded Abraham that he was credited with forgiveness earlier in time.
Circumcision was a sign that identified a person as belonging to God's
family through faith. Abraham was an uncircumcised believer and thus is
a spiritual father of all uncircumcised believers. Abraham was also a
circumcised believer and thus a spiritual father of all circumcised
believers. All who believe as Abraham believed God's Word are spiritual
children of Abraham. Every believer can claim Abraham as a spiritual
father.

保罗指出亚伯拉罕和大卫都是藉着信靠弥赛亚而在神面前洁净了自己所有的恶行。因为他们都是犹太人，他想加以明确不给人错误的印象。保罗再次提及亚伯拉罕，他是在他受割礼之前就已经被算为无罪的了。割礼差不多是在20年之后发生的事。割礼是个记号，一个印记，在外面提醒亚伯拉罕亚他曾被赐予赦免之恩。割礼的记号标志人藉着信心归在了神的家中。亚伯拉罕在没有受割礼的时候就是一个信徒，因此是所有未受割礼之信徒的属灵父亲。亚伯拉罕也是一个受割礼的信徒因此也是所有受割礼之信徒的属灵父亲。所有像亚伯拉罕一样相信神话语的人都是亚伯拉罕的属灵儿女。每一个信徒都可以称亚伯拉罕为属灵的父亲。

**DISCUSSION 讨论**

6\. Why is it important to see that Abraham was acquitted of all sin
before he was circumcised?

为什么知道亚伯拉罕是在受割礼以先被称无罪是非常重要的？

7\. How can Abraham bear the name "father of all who believe -- whether
circumcised or not?

为什么亚伯拉罕能被称为"信徒之父，无论信徒们是否受过割礼"

8\. What makes you a child of Abraham?

你如何成为亚伯拉罕的子孙？

**ROMANS 4:13-15 罗马书 4:13-15**

Abraham wasn't declared not guilty because of circumcision (9-12) nor
was it because of any law that he was given and kept (13-15). Paul was
very methodically removing every thought which someone might have to
still believe I have to obey God in order to receive his promise. Law
only produces anger -- some say God's anger over disobedience, others
argue man's anger because it is an impossible demand to keep law. Either
way it results in anger. A right standing before God comes only through
believing what he has promised and done in Jesus (13b)

亚伯拉罕不是因为割礼而被宣告无罪（9-12）也不是因为他守住了赐给他的律法（13-15）保罗非常有条理的打消人的错误认识，就是以为要遵行神的旨意才能得着祂的应许。律法只能制造怒气
------
有人说神因不顺从而发怒，有人说人因做不到遵行律法而发怒。总而言之结果都是怒气。合理的站在神面前仅仅是藉着相信祂的应许并且祂在耶稣里所成就的。（13b）

**DISCUSSION 讨论**

9\. Why do efforts to live by the law make faith and God's gospel
promise worthless?

为什么说努力靠着律法生活会使神福音的应许落空？

10\. Give two examples of religious beliefs and practices that express a
"live by law" teaching and mindset. 14

请举两个实例和行为，实际上包含"靠律法生活"的教导和心态。

**[Preparing for next week's class 预备下周的课程]{.ul}**

1.  Read Romans 4:16 -- 25

阅读罗马书 4:16 -- 25

2.  Read Romans -- the People's Bible Pages 74-78

阅读罗马书 --- 大众圣经读本 74-78页

3.  Read Romans 4:16 -- 25 a second time but this time out loud.

> 再次阅读罗马书4:16 -- 25 并朗读。

Would you say that an Old Testament person got to be innocent before God
and thus got to heaven in the same way or a different way from a New
Testament believer?

活在旧约的人需要在神面前是无罪的才能进天堂，你认为一个新约的信徒也需同样的要求才能进天堂吗？
